When DNA is damaged by sunlight, the damage is recognized differently depending on whether the DNA is transcriptionally active (transcription-coupled repair) or not (global excision repair).
After the initial recognition step, the damage is repaired in a similar manner with the final outcome being the restoration of the normal nucleotide sequence.
One form of DNA repair corrects mistakes made during DNA replication or recombination.
DNA mismatch repair is a system for recognizing and repairing erroneous insertion, deletion and mis-incorporation of bases that can arise during these processes.
Mismatch repair is a highly conserved process from prokaryotes to eukaryotes.
The Mut proteins are the major active components of this repair system.
MutS, MutH and MutL are three proteins essential in detecting the mismatch and directing repair machinery to it.
These three proteins recognize the mismatch and cause the DNA to loop out.
MutH cuts the DNA strand near the closest methylated site to the mismatch, and a helices separates the DNA strands.
The entire MutSHL complex then slides along the DNA in the direction of the mismatch, followed by an exonuclease that digests the single-stranded DNA.
The single-stranded gap created by the exonuclease is then be repaired by DNA Polymerase III.
Nucleotide Excision Repair
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) removes the vast majority of UV-induced DNA damage, mostly in the form of thymine dimers.
Genetic diseases that result from mutations in the NER genes include Xeroderma pigmentosum and Cockayne's syndrome.
NER enzymes recognize changes in the shape of the DNA double helix.
Recognition of these changes leads to the removal of the damage, creating a single-strand gap in the DNA.
This gap is subsequently filled in by DNA polymerase, which uses the undamaged strand as a template.
In E. coli , this process is controlled by the UvrABC endonuclease enzyme complex, which consists of four Uvr proteins:
UvrA, UvrB, UvrC, and DNA helicase II (or UvrD).
In eukaryotes, this process is more complicated, controlled by nine major proteins.
