This phenomena looks like a lamp or flame, and is sometimes said to move away if approached.
A great deal of folklore surrounds the legend, such as the belief that the lights are lost souls or fairies attempting to lead travelers astray.
However, science has offered several potential explanations for Will-o'-the-wisp-- from burning marsh gases to glowing fungi, to animals that glow in a similar way to lightning bugs.
There is no single path that leads to scientific knowledge, and scientists do not follow a fixed set of steps when attempting to discover the answer to scientific questions.
There are, however, certain specific features of scientific investigation.
You do not have to be a professional scientist to think like a scientist.
Everyone, including you, can use certain features of scientific thinking to analyze issues and situations in everyday life.
In science, it is assumed that the universe is a vast single system governed by basic rules and thus, things that are learned from studying one part of the universe can be applied to other parts of the universe.
For example, the same principles of motion and gravitation that explain the motion of falling objects on Earth also explain the orbit of the planets around the sun, and galaxies, as shown in the Figure below .
Thus nature, and what happens in nature, can be understood.
However, as discussed below, as more and more information and knowledge is collected and understood, scientific ideas can change.
Even though scientific knowledge usually stands the test of time, it cannot answer all questions.
With some changes over the years, similar principles of motion have applied to different situations.
The same scientific principles that help explain planetary orbits can be applied to the movement of a Ferris wheel.
Nature Can Be Understood
In science, it is presumed that events in the universe happen in patterns that can be understood by careful study.
Scientists believe that with the help of instruments that extend the human senses and our own careful observation and analysis, people can discover patterns in all of nature that can help us understand all facets of life, the world, and the universe.
Scientists think of nature as a single system controlled by natural laws.
Scientists strive to increase their understanding of the natural world by discovering natural laws.
Laws of nature are expressed as scientific laws.
