Capacitance can be thought of as the capacity a device has for storing charge .
In the parallel plate case the capacitance is given by C = \frac{\epsilon_0 A}{d} where A is the area of the plates,  d  is the distance between the plates, and  \epsilon_0  is the permittivity of free space whose value is  8.84 \times 10^{-12} C/V \cdot m  .
The electric field between the capacitor plates stores energy.
Where does this energy come from?
Recall, that in our preliminary discussion of electric forces we assert that "like charges repel one another".
To build our initial configuration we had to place an excess of positive and negative charges, respectively, on each of the metal plates.
Forcing these charges together on the plate had to overcome the mutual repulsion that the charges experience; this takes work.
The energy used in moving the charges onto the plates gets stored in the field between the plates.
It is in this way that the capacitor can be thought of as an energy storage device.
This property will become more important when we study capacitors in the context of electric circuits in the next several Concepts.
Note:
Many home-electronic circuits include capacitors; for this reason, it can be dangerous to mess around with old electronic components, as the capacitors may be charged even if the unit is unplugged.
For example, old computer monitors (not flat screens) and TVs have capacitors that hold dangerous amounts of charge hours after the power is turned off.
You have a capacitor with capacitance 100\text{nF} .
If you connected it to a 12V battery, how much energy is stored in the capacitor when it is fully charged?
If you were to submerge this capacitor in water, how much energy could be stored in it?
We'll just use the equation given above to calculate the energy stored on the capacitor.
By adding a dielectric, we increase the capacitance of the capacitor by a factor of the dielectric constant.
The dielectric constant of water is 80, so the new capacitance will be 80 times the original capacitance.
Watch this Explanation
