The atoms were unchangeable, indestructible, and always existed.
Portrait of Democritus
The word “ atom ” comes from the Greek atomos and means “indivisible.” The atomists of the time (Democritus being one of the leading atomists) believed there were two realities that made up the physical world: atoms and void.
There was an infinite number of atoms, but different types of atoms had different sizes and shapes.
The void was the empty space in which the atoms moved and collided with one another.
When these atoms collided with one another, they might repel each other or they might connect in clusters, held together by tiny hooks and barbs on the surface of the atoms.
Aristotle disagreed with Democritus and offered his own idea of the composition of matter.  According to Aristotle, everything was composed of four elements: earth, air, fire, and water.  The theory of Democritus explained things better, but Aristotle was more influential, so his ideas prevailed.  We had to wait almost two thousand years before scientists came around to seeing the atom as Democritus did.
How right was Democritus?
It is very interesting that Democritus had the basic idea of atoms, even though he had no experimental evidence to support his thinking.
We now know more about how atoms hold together in “clusters” (compounds), but the basic concept existed over two thousand years ago.
We also know that atoms can be further subdivided, but there is still a lower limit to how small we can break up that grain of sand.
Greek philosophers debated about many things.
Aristotle and others believed that a grain of sand could be divided indefinitely.
Democritus believed there was a lower limit to the dividing of a grain of sand.
Use the link below to answer the following questions:
Who influenced the thinking of Democritus?
Who were the atomists?
How did Democritus explain how we saw objects?
What type of atom did Democritus believe the soul was composed of?
How did the ancient Greek philosophers spend their time?
