Use the lens equation to locate image positions for objects that are outside 2F, between 2F and F, and inside F of convex lenses.
Use the magnification equation to determine image sizes for convex lenses.
Refracting telescope at the Lick Observatory
Refracting telescopes, such as the one shown here, use lenses to focus the image.
The telescope in this picture is one of the largest refracting telescopes in the world, and can be found in the Lick Observatory in San Jose, California.
You can get more information about this telescope at: www.ucolick.org/public/telescopes/36-inch.html .
Images in Double Convex Lenses
Lenses are made of transparent material such as glass or plastic with an index of refraction greater than that of air.
At least one of the faces is a part of a sphere; a convex lens  is thicker at the center than the edges, and a concave lens  is thicker at the edges than the center.
Convex lenses are called converging lenses, because they refract parallel light rays so that they meet.
They are one of the most useful and important parts of all optical devices, and are found in eyeglasses, telescopes, microscopes, magnifying glasses, cameras and many other objects.
Both the mirror equation and the magnification equation also apply to lenses.
However, when dealing with lenses, the mirror equation is renamed the Lens Equation.
Image formed by a convex lens
Double convex lenses have focal points on both sides of the lens, but it is also necessary to use points at twice the focal length to locate objects and images.
Therefore, along the principal axis, there are points identified as F  and as 2F  on both sides of the lens.
As with mirrors, we only need to trace two rays in order to locate the image for lenses.
Both rays change direction while inside the lens, and their convergence point on the opposite side of the lens is the image location.
As can be seen in the figure above, Ray 1 approaches the lens parallel to the principal axis and is refracted through the focal point on the other side.
Ray 2 travels through the focal point and is then refracted parallel to the principal axis.
