The Impact of the Theory of Special Relativity
A great many experiments have been performed to test the predictions of special relativity.
No contradictions have been found.
Scientists have therefore accepted special relativity as an accurate description of nature.
When the relative velocities of objects are considerably less than the speed of light, the formulas for relativistic time, length, and mass all reduce to the classical formulas.
It is required that the two theories correspond where they overlap at speeds much less than c .
Special relativity does not contradict classical mechanics.
Rather, it is a more general theory needed for object speeds approaching the speed of light.
The special theory of relativity essentially explains how to interpret motion between different inertial frames of reference, that is, places that are moving at constant speeds relative to each other.
Special relativity is based on two postulates:
The laws of physics are the same for all observers within their own inertial reference frame.
The speed of light in a vacuum is the same for all observers regardless of their relative motion or the motion of the source of the light.
The special theory of relativity explains the unchangeable speed of light better than classical mechanics, but it also has some surprising consequences.
For example, according to the theory of special relativity,
Two events that occurred simultaneously for one observer were not simultaneous for another observer if the two observers had relative motion to each other. (Relativity of simultaneity).
Clocks in a moving frame of reference tick more slowly than an observer’s “stationary” clock. (Time dilation).
Objects are measured to be shorter in the direction that they are moving with respect to a stationary observer. (Length contraction).
The mass of a moving object will be greater as measured by an observer at rest.
E = mc^2 , energy and mass are equivalent and transmutable. (Mass-energy equivalence).
No physical object can travel faster than the speed of light in a vacuum. (Maximum speed is finite).
