CF can result from more than a thousand different mutations; currently it is not possible to test for each one.
As new DNA testing methodologies are developed, testing for more mutations will become more common and less expensive.
Testing analyzes DNA for the most common mutations, such as a deletion of amino acid 508 (phenylalenine, also known as ΔF508).
If a family has a known uncommon mutation, specific screening for that mutation can be performed.
However, it must be noted that because there may be other not yet identified mutations that result in CF, and as not all known mutations are found on current tests, a negative screen does not guarantee that a child will not have CF.
Tay-Sachs disease is a genetic disorder that is fatal in its most common variant, known as Infantile Tay-Sachs disease.
Tay-Sachs is an autosomal recessive disorder, requiring the inheritance of a defective gene from each parent.
The disease results from the accumulation of harmful quantities of fat in the nerve cells of the brain.
Tay-Sachs results from mutations in the HEXA gene located on chromosome 15, which encodes the alpha-subunit of the lysosomal enzyme beta-N-acetylhexosaminidase A, which normally breaks down the fat.
More than 90 mutations, including substitutions, insertions, deletions, splice site mutations, and other more complex patterns have been characterized in this gene, and new mutations are still being reported.
Each of these mutations alters the protein product, inhibiting the function of the enzyme.
Tay-Sachs disease is a rare disease.
Unaffected carriers of a Tay-Sachs allele may not know they have the allele.
Other autosomal disorders such as cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anemia are far more common.
The importance of Tay-Sachs lies in the fact that an inexpensive enzyme assay test was developed.
The automation of this analysis has provided one of the first "mass screening" tools in medical genetics.
Two unaffected carriers can have a child homozygous for a Tay-Sachs allele, resulting, currently, in a lethal phenotype.
Tay-Sachs alleles are maintained in a population through these unknowing heterozygous carriers.
Anyone can be a carrier of the Tay-Sachs mutation, but the disease is most common among the Ashkenazi Jewish population.
About 1 in every 27 members of the Ashkenazi Jewish population carries the Tay-Sachs gene.
