More than 3,500 species of native bees pollinate crops.
Some scientists estimate that one out of every three bites of food we eat exists because of animal pollinators, including birds and bats and arthropods like bees, butterflies and moths, and beetles and other insects.
Lobsters are an arthropod food source
Lobsters are one kind of arthropod food source.
Arthropods in Pest Control
Humans use mites to prey on unwanted arthropods on farms or in homes.
Other arthropods are used to control weed growth.
Populations of whip scorpions added to an environment can limit the populations of cockroaches and crickets.
Millipedes also control the harmful growth of destructive fungi and bacteria.
When the numbers of millipedes is low, the imbalance between predator and prey can cause harmful microorganisms to flourish, and it can became difficult to manage plagues and diseases through natural processes.
Cockroaches, spiders, mites, ticks and all other insects considered as carnivorous, prey on smaller species to maintain ecological balance.
Thus, communities that have a good balance of these arthropods tend to have better pest control.
Many arthropods have extremely important roles in ecosystems.
Arthropods are of ecological importance because of their sheer numbers and extreme diversity.
As mentioned above, bees, wasps, ants, butterflies, moths, flies and beetles are invaluable agents of pollination.
Pollens and grains became accidentally attached to their chests and legs and are transferred to other agricultural crops as these animals move about, either by walking or flying.
Most plants actually produce scents to send signals to insects that food (in the form of nectar) is available.
Mites, ticks, centipedes, and millipedes are decomposers , meaning they break down dead plants and animals and turn them into soil nutrients.
This is an important role because it supplies the plants with the minerals and nutrients necessary for life.
It also keeps dead material from accumulating in the environment.
