A widely accepted hypothesis that stands the test of time.
Theories are often tested, and usually not rejected.
The Scientific Method Made Easy explains the scientific method:
Click on the image above for more content
Scientists first make observations that raise questions.
An observation is the act of noting or detecting phenomenon through the senses.
For example, noting that a room is dark is an observation made through sight.
In order to explain the observed phenomenon, scientists develop a number of possible explanations, or hypotheses.
A hypothesis is a suggested explanation for a phenomenon or a suggested explanation for a relationship between many phenomena.
Hypotheses are always based on evidence that can be tested by observation or experimentation.
Scientific investigations are required to test hypotheses.
Scientists mostly base hypotheses on prior observations or on extensions of existing scientific explanations.
Though many people describe a hypothesis as an "educated guess," that definition is not scientifically accurate.
To define a hypothesis as "an educated guess" is like calling a tricycle a "vehicle with three." This definition of a tricycle leaves out its most important and characteristic feature: its wheels.
The "educated guess" definition of a hypothesis also leaves out the concept's most important and characteristic feature: the purpose of the hypotheses.
People generate hypotheses as early attempts to explain patterns observed in nature or to predict the outcomes of experiments.
For example, in science, one could correctly call the following statement a hypothesis: identical twins can have different personalities because environment influences personality.
Scientific methods require hypotheses that are falsifiable , that is, they must be framed in a way that allows other scientists to prove them false.
Proving a hypothesis to be false is usually done by observation and experimentation.
However, confirming or failing to falsify a hypothesis does not necessarily mean the hypothesis is true.
