meteorology - the study of Earth’s atmosphere.
In astronomy it is impossible, when testing the hypothesis "suns are collapsed clouds of hydrogen", to start out with a giant cloud of hydrogen, and then carry out the experiment of waiting a few billion years for it to form a sun.
However, by observing various clouds of hydrogen in various states of collapse and other phenomena related to the hypothesis such as the nebula shown in Figure below , researchers can collect the data they need to support (or maybe falsify) the hypothesis.
An early example of this type of experiment was the first verification in the 1600s that light does not travel from place to place instantaneously, but instead has a speed that can be measured.
Observation of the appearance of the moons of Jupiter were slightly delayed when Jupiter was farther from Earth, as opposed to when Jupiter was closer to Earth.
This phenomenon was used to demonstrate that the difference in the time of appearance of the moons was consistent with a measurable speed of light.
The Helix nebula, located about 700 light-years away in the constellation Aquarius, belongs to a class of objects called planetary nebulae .
Planetary nebulae are the remains of stars that once looked a lot like our sun.
When sun-like stars die, they puff out their outer gaseous layers.
These layers are heated by the hot core of the dead star, called a white dwarf, and shine with infrared and visible colors.
Scientists can study the birth and death of stars by analyzing the types of light that are emitted from nebulae.
There are situations where it would be wrong or harmful to carry out an experiment.
In these cases, scientists carry out a natural experiment, or an investigation without an experiment.
For example, alcohol can cause developmental defects in fetuses, leading to mental and physical problems, through a condition called fetal alcohol syndrome.
Certain researchers want to study the effects of alcohol on fetal development, but it would be considered wrong or unethical to ask a group of pregnant women to drink alcohol to study its effects on their children.
Instead, researchers carry out a natural experiment in which they study data that is gathered from mothers of children with fetal alcohol syndrome, or pregnant women who continue to drink alcohol during pregnancy.
The researchers will try to reduce the number of variables in the study (such as the amount or type of alcohol consumed), which might affect their data.
It is important to note that the researchers do not influence or encourage the consumption of alcohol; they collect this information from volunteers.
Field experiments are so named to distinguish them from lab experiments.
Field experiments have the advantage that observations are made in a natural setting rather than in a human-made laboratory environment.
