To nonscientists, the competition, frustration, cooperation, and disagreement between research scientists can seem disorganized.
Scientific knowledge develops from humans trying to figure things out.
Scientific research and discoveries are carried out by people—people who have virtues, values, shortcomings, and limitations—just like everyone else.
As a result, science and research can be influenced by the values of the society in which the research is carried out.
How do such values influence research?
This question is of interest to more than just the scientific community.
Science is becoming a larger part of everyone’s life, from developing more effective medicines, to developing more productive crops, and to designing innovative air conditioning systems that are modeled after the self-cooling nests of termites.
The public has become more interested in learning more about the areas of science that affect everyday life.
As a result, scientists have become more accountable to a society that expects to benefit from their work.
It costs money to carry out scientific studies.
Things such as the cost of equipment, transportation, rent, and salaries for the people carrying out the research all need to be considered before a study can begin.
The systems of financial support for scientists and their work have been important influences of the type of research and the pace of how that research is conducted.
Today, funding for research comes from many different sources, some of which include:
government, for example, through the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
military funding, such as through the Department of Defense,
non-profit organizations, such as the Muscular Dystrophy Association, the American Cancer Society and American Heart Association,
When the economy of a country slows down, the amount of money available for funding research is usually reduced, because both governments and businesses try to save funds by reducing certain non-essential expenses.
Many pharmaceutical companies are heavily invested in research and development, on which they spend many millions of dollars every year.
The companies aim to research and develop drugs that can be marketed and sold to treat certain illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, or heart disease.
Areas of research in which the companies do not see any hope of a return on their huge investments are not likely to be studied.
