What is Moseley’s law?
Did Mendeleev know about the nucleus of an atom?
Who discovered the relationship between wavelength of X-rays and atomic number?
What did Moseley conclude from his research?
What is the “periodic law”?
What do the vertical columns (groups) in the periodic table represent?
group:  Elements with similar chemical properties appear at regular intervals, within the vertical columns.
period:  A period is a horizontal row of the periodic table.
periodic law:  When elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic number, there is a periodic repetition of their chemical and physical properties.
Modern Periodic Table:
Periods and Groups
Describe the organization of the modern periodic table.
The periodic table is like a dictionary
How has the English dictionary evolved over time?
Language changes with time.  New words enter the language and old words often disappear from lack of use.  Dictionaries are published so that people can keep up with changes in language and know how to use words properly.  These publications may be in print, as is the law dictionary below, or they may be electronic.  Dictionaries can be found on the internet and apps are available for smartphones.
Dictionaries are invaluable for good, reliable communication.
The Modern Periodic Table
The periodic table has undergone extensive changes in the time since it was originally developed by Mendeleev and Moseley.  Many new elements have been discovered, while others have been artificially synthesized.  Each fits properly into a group of elements with similar properties.  The periodic table is an arrangement of the elements in order of their atomic numbers so that elements with similar properties appear in the same vertical column or group.
The figure below shows the most commonly used form of the periodic table.  Each square shows the chemical symbol of the element along with its name.  Notice that several of the symbols seem to be unrelated to the name of the element:
Fe for iron, Pb for lead, etc.
