A scientist can also be defined as someone who uses the scientific method.
A scientist may be an expert in one or more areas of science, such as biology, or more specifically biochemistry, genetics or ecology.
Regardless of the specialty of the scientist, a common factor that unites all scientists is that they perform research to work towards a more comprehensive understanding of nature.
What Is a Scientist?
Science and Society
Biology literally means "the study of life." It is also a science that is consistently used in our everyday lives.
Biology is a very broad field, covering topics from the intricate workings of chemical processes inside our cells, to the more broad concepts of ecosystems and global climate change.
Biologists study minute details of the human brain, the make up of our genes, and even the functioning of our reproductive system.
For example, biologists recently finished decoding the human genome, the sequence of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) bases that may determine much of our abilities and predispositions for certain illnesses and can also play a major role in many court cases.
For example, criminals have been caught, victims identified, and wrongly imprisoned people have been freed based on DNA evidence.
We are constantly being blitzed with headlines about possible health risks from certain foods as well as possible benefits of eating other foods.
Commercials try to sell us the latest “miracle” pill for easy, fast weight loss.
Most people may choose the conventional medications that can be bought at the pharmacy.
However, many people are turning to herbal remedies to ease arthritis pain, improve memory, as well as improve their mood.
It is important to know the effects that such supplements, such as the ones shown in Figure below , and medications can have on the body.
Nutritional supplements.
Understanding how your body works and how nutrients work will help you decide whether you need to take a nutritional supplement.
It will also help you make sense of the large amount of information available about regular medicines, if and when you need to take them.
Can just one biology course give you the answers to these everyday questions?
No, but it can assist you in learning how to sift through the biases of investigators, the press, and others in a quest to critically evaluate the question.
