The term "vaccine" comes from Edward Jenner's use of cowpox ( vacca means cow in Latin), to immunize people against smallpox.
The material in the vaccine can either be weakened forms of a living pathogen or virus, dead pathogens (or inactivated viruses), purified material such as viral proteins, or genetically engineered pieces of a pathogen.
The material in the vaccine will cause the body to mount an immune response, so the person will develop immunity to the disease.
Smallpox was the first disease people tried to prevent by purposely inoculating themselves with other types of infections such as cowpox.
Vaccination is an effective way of preventing viral infections.
Vaccinations can be given in schools, shown in the Figure below , health clinics, and even at home.
Their use has resulted in a dramatic decline in morbidity (illness) and mortality (death) associated with viral infections such as polio, measles, mumps, and rubella.
Genetically engineered vaccines are produced through recombinant DNA technology.
Most new vaccines are produced with this technology.
A young student receiving a vaccination
A young student receives a vaccine.
A worldwide vaccination campaign by the World Health Organization led to the eradication of smallpox in 1979.
Smallpox is a contagious disease unique to humans and is caused by two Variola viruses.
The eradication of smallpox was possible because humans are the only carriers of the virus.
To this day, smallpox is the only human infectious disease to have been completely eradicated from nature.
Scientists are hoping to eradicate polio next.
While people have been able to prevent certain viral diseases by vaccinations for many hundreds of years, the development of antiviral drugs to treat viral diseases is a relatively recent development.
Antiviral drugs are medications used specifically for treating the symptoms of viral infections.
The first antiviral drug was interferon , a substance that is naturally produced by certain immune cells when an infection is detected.
Over the past twenty years the development of antiretroviral drugs (also known as antiretroviral therapy, or ART) has increased rapidly.
