This segment correlates with the region that is absent in the mutant ( Figure below ).
One example of a gap gene is the Krüppel gene, which regulates the activity of a number of other genes.
Krüppel literally means "cripple" in German, named for the crippled appearance of mutant larva.
Gap genes are defined by the effect of a mutation in that gene, and Krüppel is one such effect.
Other gap genes are known as tailless and knirps (a "squirt or whippersnapper").
Gap genes encode transcription factors which directly effect the expression of additional genes involved in embryo segmentation, called the pair-rule genes .
Pair-rule genes are expressed in alternating segments within the developing embryo.
Pair-rule genes have very creative names, such as even-skipped, hairy, odd-skipped, odd-paired, sloppy paired and fushi tarazu , which is Japanese for “few segments.” See My favorite silly gene names at for a list of other interesting gene names.
Gap genes control the expression of other genes within specific regions of cells in the developing organism.
This allows specific genes to be expressed in certain cells at the appropriate stage of development.
Gap genes themselves are under the effect of maternal effect genes, such as bicoid and nanos.
Gap genes also regulate each other to achieve their precise striped expression patterns.
The maternal effect is when the phenotype of offspring is partly determined by the phenotype of its mother, irrespective of genotype.
This often occurs when the mother supplies mRNA or proteins to the egg, affecting early development.
In developing Drosophila, maternal effects include axis determination.
The bicoid maternal effect gene is transcribed in the nurse cells of the mother and then the mRNA is transferred to the oocyte.
Mutant embryos from homozygous mutant bicoid mothers fail to produce head and thorax structures.
Gap gene expression.
Shown is the expression pattern of four gap genes, Krüppel, Giant, Knirps, and Tailless, in a developing Drosophilia embryo.
Note how the expression of these genes creates an unique pattern resulting in gaps in what was a rather uniform arrangement of cells.
