How does an electroscope work?
An electroscope is a device used to study charge.  When a positively charged object (the rod) nears the upper post, electrons flow to the top of the jar leaving the two gold leaves postivley charged.
The leaves repel each other since both hold postive, like charges.
The VSEPR theory says that electron pairs, also a set of like charges, will repel each other such that the shape of the molecule will adjust so that the valence electron-pairs stay as far apart from each other as possible.
Central Atom with No Lone Pairs
In order to easily understand the types of molecules possible, we will use a simple system to identify the parts of any molecule.
A = central atom in a molecule
B = atoms surrounding the central atom
Subscripts after the B will denote the number of B atoms that are bonded to the central A atom.  For example, AB 4 is a molecule with a central atom surrounded by four covalently bonded atoms.  Again, it does not matter if those bonds are single, double, or triple bonds.
AB 2 :
Beryllium hydride (BeH 2 )
Beryllium hydride consists of a central beryllium atom with two single bonds to hydrogen atoms.  Recall that it violates the octet rule.
According to the requirement that electron pairs maximize their distance from one another, the two bonding pairs in the BeH 2 molecules will arrange themselves on directly opposite sides of the central Be atom.  The resulting geometry is a linear molecule, shown in the Figure below in a “ball and stick” model.
Model of beryllium hydride, which is linear
Beryllium hydride model.
The bond angle from H-Be-H is 180° because of its linear geometry.
Carbon dioxide is another example of a molecule which falls under the AB 2 category.  Its Lewis structure consists of double bonds between the central carbon and the oxygen atoms (see Figure below ).
Structure of carbon dioxide, which is linear
Carbon dioxide bonding.
The repulsion between the two groups of four electrons (two pairs) is no different than the repulsion of the two groups of two electrons (one pair) in the BeH 2 molecule.  Carbon dioxide is also linear (see Figure below ).
