Cytokinins were discovered from attempts to grow plant tissue in artificial environments ( Figure below ).
Cytokinins prevent the process of aging (senescence).
So florists sometimes apply cytokinins to cut flowers, so they do not get old and die.
Cytokinins promote cell division and are necessary for growing plants in tissue culture
Cytokinins promote cell division and are necessary for growing plants in tissue culture.
A small piece of a plant is placed in sterile conditions to regenerate a new plant.
Abscisic acid is misnamed because it was once believed to play a role in abscission (the dropping of leaves, fruits, and flowers), but we now know abscission is caused by ethylene.
The actual role of abscisic acid is to close the stomata, the tiny openings in leaves that allow substances to enter and leave, and to maintain dormancy.
When a plant is stressed due to lack of water, abscisic acid tells the stomata to close.
This prevents water loss through the stomata.
When the environment is not good for a seed to germinate, abscisic acid signals for the dormancy period of the seed to continue.
Abscisic acid also tells the buds of plants to stay in the dormancy stage.
When conditions improve, the levels of abscisic acid drop and the levels of gibberellins increase, signaling that is time to break dormancy ( Figure below ).
=A decrease in levels of abscisic acid allows these buds to break dormancy and put out leaves
A decrease in levels of abscisic acid allows these buds to break dormancy and put out leaves.
Auxins are hormones that play a role in plant growth.
Auxins produced at the tip of the plant are involved in apical dominance , when the main central stem grows more strongly than other stems and branches.
When the tip of the plant is removed, the auxins are no longer present, and the side branches begin to grow.
This is why pruning a plant by cutting off the main branches helps produce a fuller plant with more branches.
You actually need to cut branches off of a plant for it to grow more branches!
