You want to add some sections to the porch seen above.
Before you go to the hardware store to buy lumber, you need to determine the unit composition (the material between two large uprights).
You count how many posts, how many boards, how many rails – then you decide how many sections you want to add before you calculate the amount of building material needed for your porch expansion.
Stoichiometry problems can be characterized by two things: (1) the information given in the problem, and (2) the information that is to be solved for, referred to as the unknown .
The given and the unknown may both be reactants, both be products, or one may be a reactant while the other is a product.
The amounts of the substances can be expressed in moles.
However, in a laboratory situation, it is common to determine the amount of a substance by finding its mass in grams.
The amount of a gaseous substance may be expressed by its volume.
In this concept, we will focus on the type of problem where both the given and the unknown quantities are expressed in moles.
The relationship between moles of a given and unknown substance
Mole ratio relationship.
Chemical equations express the amounts of reactants and products in a reaction.
The coefficients of a balanced equation can represent either the number of molecules or the number of moles of each substance.
The production of ammonia (NH 3 ) from nitrogen and hydrogen gases is an important industrial reaction called the Haber process, after German chemist Fritz Haber.
\text{N}_2 (g)+3\text{H}_2 (g) \rightarrow 2\text{NH}_3 (g)
The balanced equation can be analyzed in several ways, as shown in the Figure below .
Representation of the reaction between nitrogen and hydrogen to form ammonia
This representation of the production of ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen show several ways to interpret the quantitative information of a chemical reaction.
We see that 1 molecule of nitrogen reacts with 3 molecules of nitrogen to form 2 molecules of ammonia.
This is the smallest possible relative amounts of the reactants and products.
