You know that the fish you had for lunch contained protein molecules.
But do you know that the atoms in that protein could easily have formed the color in a dragonfly’s eye, the heart of a water flea, and the whiplike tail of a Euglena before they hit your plate as sleek fish muscle?
Food consists of organic (carbon-containing) molecules which store energy in the chemical bonds between their atoms.
Organisms use the atoms of food molecules to build larger organic molecules including proteins, DNA, and fats (lipids) and use the energy in food to power life processes.
By breaking the bonds in food molecules, cells release energy to build new compounds.
Although some energy dissipates as heat at each energy transfer, much of it is stored in the newly made molecules.
Chemical bonds in organic molecules are a reservoir of the energy used to make them.
Fueled by the energy from food molecules, cells can combine and recombine the elements of life to form thousands of different molecules.
Both the energy (despite some loss) and the materials (despite being reorganized) pass from producer to consumer – perhaps from algal tails, to water flea hearts, to dragonfly eye colors, to fish muscle, to you!
The process of photosynthesis, which usually begins the flow of energy through life, uses many different kinds of energy-carrying molecules to transform sunlight energy into chemical energy and build food.
Some carrier molecules hold energy briefly, quickly shifting it like a hot potato to other molecules.
This strategy allows energy to be released in small, controlled amounts.
An example starts in chlorophyll, the green pigment present in most plants, which helps convert solar energy to chemical energy.
When a chlorophyll molecule absorbs light energy, electrons are excited and "jump" to a higher energy level.
The excited electrons then bounce to a series of carrier molecules, losing a little energy at each step.
Most of the "lost" energy powers some small cellular task, such as moving ions across a membrane or building up another molecule.
Another short-term energy carrier important to photosynthesis, NADPH , holds chemical energy a bit longer but soon "spends" it to help to build sugar.
Two of the most important energy-carrying molecules are glucose and adenosine triphosphate, commonly referred to as ATP .
These are nearly universal fuels throughout the living world and are both key players in photosynthesis, as shown below.
A molecule of glucose, which has the chemical formula C 6 H 12 O 6 , carries a packet of chemical energy just the right size for transport and uptake by cells.
