Noninfectious diseases can't be passed from one person to another.
Instead, these types of diseases are caused by factors such as the environment, genetics, and lifestyle.
Examples of inherited noninfectious conditions include cystic fibrosis and Down syndrome.
If you're born with these conditions, you must learn how to manage the symptoms.
Examples of conditions caused by environmental or lifestyle factors include heart disease and skin cancer.
We can't change our genetic codes, but there are plenty of ways to prevent other noninfectious diseases.
For example, cutting down on exposure to cigarette smoke and the sun's rays will prevent certain types of cancer.
It is a fact that most chronic noninfectious diseases can be prevented.
The chronic noninfectious diseases that cause the most deaths in many developed countries are largely preventable.
These diseases are heart disease, stroke, diabetes and cancer, and though they do have some genetic components, they also have many lifestyle components.
For example, some cancers have genetic risks, but people at high risk for cancers can have screening examinations to catch them early or sometimes can take other steps to prevent the cancers.
Heart disease, stroke and diabetes are mostly linked to lifestyle choices, even when family history puts a person at higher risk for the diseases.
Most allergies can be prevented by avoiding the substances that cause them.
For example, you can avoid pollens by staying indoors as much as possible.
You can learn to recognize plants like poison ivy and not touch them.
A good way to remember how to avoid poison ivy is "leaves of three, let it be." Some people receive allergy shots to help prevent allergic reactions.
The shots contain tiny amounts of allergens, which are the substances that cause an allergic reaction.
After many months or years of shots, the immune system gets used to the allergens and no longer responds to them.
Type 1 diabetes and other autoimmune diseases cannot be prevented.
But choosing a healthy lifestyle can help prevent type 2 diabetes.
