One type of gene, a pro to-oncogene, is normally a transcription factor.
When transcription does not occur properly, detrimental effects can result.
Regulation of Gene Expression in Cancer
Carcinogenesis is the process by which normal cells are transformed into cancer cells.
The process is also known as oncogenesis or tumorigenesis and it depends on both the activation of oncogenes and deactivation of tumor suppressor genes .
Proto-oncogenes, the non-cancerous normal version of an oncogene, can be a transcription factor like c-fos, c-jun and c-myc, or a gene whose product is involved in signal transduction, leading to altered gene expression.
When mutations cause the regulation of this process to be disturbed, cell proliferation can be enhanced leading to tumorigenesis.
At least two separate mutations are necessary to develop cancer.
For example, a mutation in a proto-oncogene would not necessarily lead to cancer, as normally functioning tumor suppressor genes would counteract the effects of the oncogene.
It is the second mutation in the tumor suppressor gene that could lead to uncontrolled cell growth and possibly cancer.
Gene expression, signal transduction, the cell cycle and oncogenes seem to have an interconnected relationship with each other inside the cell.
Both oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes play an important role in gene regulation and cell proliferation ( Figure below ).
As stated above, numerous oncogenes are involved in gene expression.
Signal transduction pathways are filled with proteins involved in ultimately altering gene expression (see the Cell Communication:
Signal Transduction (Advanced) concept).
Anytime one of the involved proteins is altered, such as when its gene is mutated, gene expression can be altered.
How Cancer Develops.
This flow chart shows how a series of mutations in tumor-suppressor genes and proto-oncogenes leads to cancer.
The products of proto-oncogenes are required for normal growth, repair and homeostasis.
However, when these genes are mutated, they turn into oncogenes and play a role in the development of cancer.
