Carnivorous, or animal-eating turtles usually have knife-sharp ridges for slicing through their prey.
But as the turtle is not a very fast animal, and it cannot quickly turn its head to snap at prey, it does have some limitations.
Sea turtles typically feed on jellyfish, sponges and other soft-bodied organisms.
Some species of sea turtle with stronger jaws eat shellfish, while other species, such as the green sea turtle, do not eat any meat at all.
Herbivorous turtles have serrated ridges that help them cut through tough plants.
How Big Are Turtles?
The largest turtle is the great leatherback sea turtle ( Figure below ), which can have a shell length of seven feet and can weigh more than 2,000 pounds.
The only surviving giant tortoises are on the Seychelles and Galápagos Islands and can grow to over four feet in length and weigh about 670 pounds ( Figure below ).
The smallest turtle is the speckled padloper tortoise of South Africa, measuring no more than three inches in length, and weighing about five ounces.
The largest ever turtle was the know extinct Archelon genus, a Late Cretaceous sea turtle known to have been up to 15 ft long, and 16 ft wide from flipper to flipper.
The closest living relative of this genus is the leatherback sea turtle.
It was the giant Galápagos tortoises that Charles Darwin studied during his voyage on the Beagle, providing significant evidence that he used to support his theory of evolution.
Picture of a leatherback turtle
The leatherback turtle can reach up to seven feet in length and weigh over 2,000 pounds.
Picture of a giant tortoise
A giant tortoise can grow to over feet ft in length and weigh about 670 lb.
These animals can easily live over 100 years, spending their days grazing on grass, leaves, and cactus, basking in the sun, and napping nearly 16 hours each day.
Most turtle bodies are covered by a special bony or cartilaginous shell developed from their ribs.
Turtles cannot breathe in water, although many turtles spend large amounts of their lives underwater.
Use the resources below to answer the questions that follow.
