Why be organized?
It can be said organization leads to efficiency.
And in you, cells are organized into tissues, which are organized into organs, which are organized into organ systems, which form you.
And it can be said that the human body is a very organized and efficient system.
Organization of Cells
Biological organization exists at all levels in organisms.
It can be seen at the smallest level, in the molecules that make up such compounds as DNA and proteins, to the largest level, in an organism such as a blue whale, the largest mammal on Earth.
Similarly, single celled prokaryotes and eukaryotes show order in the way their cells are arranged.
Single-celled organisms such as an amoeba are free-floating and independent-living.
Their single-celled "bodies" are able to carry out all the processes of life such as metabolism and respiration without help from other cells.
Some single-celled organisms such as bacteria can group together and form a colony.
A colony refers to a group of individual organisms of the same species that live closely together.
This is usually done to benefit the group, such as by providing a stronger defense or the ability to attack bigger prey.
A colony can also form from organisms other than bacteria.
A bacterial colony often defends from a single organism, producing a colony of genetically identical individuals.
A specific type of colony of microorganisms is a biofilm.
A biofilm is a large grouping of many microorganisms that sticks to a surface and makes a protective coating over itself.
Biofilms can show similarities to multicellular organisms, in the sense that a biofilm will have properties and capabilities greater than the capabilities of the individual organisms.
Division of labor is the process in which one group of cells does one job (such as making the "glue" that sticks the biofilm to the surface), while another group of cells does another job (such as taking in nutrients).
Multicellular organisms carry out their life processes through division of labor and they have specialized cells that have specific functions.
