Becquerel also showed that the uranium salt emissions could be affected by a magnetic field, which was not true for X-rays.
Becquerel’s experiment involved uranium exposed to photographic plate
Becquerel’s experiment - uranium exposure to photographic plate.
Pierre and Marie Curie studied the properties of uranium salts with the express purpose of identifying the details of these emissions.
They were the first to coin the term “ radioactivity ”, meaning the spontaneous emission of radiation in the form of particles or high energy photons resulting from a nuclear reaction.
The major contributions to the work came from Marie who showed that the amount of radioactivity present was due to the amount of a specific element and not due to some chemical reaction.
She discovered the element polonium and named it after her native Poland.
Madame Curie shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics with her husband Pierre and Henri Becquerel.
She won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911.
Becquerel’s experiment involved uranium exposed to photographic plate
Pierre and Marie Curie in their lab.
Ernest Rutherford, a later researcher, was able to show there are three different types of radioactive emissions.
These emission types differed in terms of mass, charge, and their ability to penetrate materials.
He designated them simply as alpha (α) emissions, beta (β) emissions, and gamma (γ) emissions.
Radioactivity involves the spontaneous emission of material and/or energy from the nucleus of an atom.
The most common radioactive atoms have high atomic numbers and contain a large excess of neutrons.
Some typical radioactive elements are technetium (atomic number 43), promethium (atomic number 61), and all elements atomic number 84 (polonium) and higher.
There are four primary types of emission, either involving the release of a particle from the nucleus or the release of energy.
In many instances, both energy and a particle are produced by the radioactive event.
It should be noted that some elements considered to be stable do have radioactive isotopes.
