The diversity of life found on Earth today is the result of 4 billion years of evolution.
Some of this diversity is shown in Figure below .
The origin of life is not completely understood by science, though limited evidence suggests that life may already have been well-established a few 100 million years after Earth formed.
Until approximately 600 million years ago, all life was made up of single-celled organisms.
The level of biodiversity found in the fossil record suggests that the last few million years include the period of greatest biodiversity in the Earth's history.
However, not all scientists support this view, since there is a lot of uncertainty as to how strongly the fossil record is biased by the greater availability and preservation of more recent fossil-containing rock layers.
Some researchers argue that modern biodiversity is not much different from biodiversity 300 million years ago.
Estimates of the present global species diversity vary from 5 million to 30 million species, with a best estimate of somewhere near 10 million species.
All living organisms are classified into one of the six kingdoms:
Archaebacteria (Archaea), Eubacteria (Bacteria), Protista (Protists), Fungi, Plantae (Plants), and Animalia (Animals).
New species are regularly discovered and many, though already discovered, are not yet classified.  The animal kingdom comprises just a tiny portion of classified organisms.
Every year, scientists discover the existence of many hundreds more archaea and bacteria than were previously known.
More about the diversity of living creatures will be discussed throughout numerous concepts.
Animal diversity.
This figure shows just a fraction of the diversity of life.
The diversity of organisms found in the five kingdoms of life, dwarf the number of organisms found in the animal kingdom.
The other kingdoms of life are Eubacteria, Archaebacteria, Protista, Fungi, and Plantae.
biodiversity :
The variety of life and its processes; including the variety of living organisms, the genetic differences among them, and the communities and ecosystems in which they occur.
biological interactions :
