Beginning in the late 1970’s, ozone depletion was recognized as a significant environmental issue.
The most dramatic decrease in ozone occurs seasonally over the continent of Antarctica.
The size and duration of the ozone hole steadily increased, with the largest hole recorded in 2006.
Fortunately, most countries have recognized the danger of CFCs and dramatically curtailed their use in recent years.
It is hoped that ozone depletion will slow and that the ozone layer may eventually be restored to its earlier levels.
An alkyl halide is an organic compound in which one or more halogen atoms are substituted for one or more hydrogen atoms in a hydrocarbon.
The general formulas for organic molecules with functional groups use the letter R to stand for the rest of the molecule outside of the functional group.
Because there are four possible halogen atoms (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, or iodine) that can act as the functional group, we use the general formula R−X to represent an alkyl halide.
The rules for naming simple alkyl halides are listed below.
Name the parent compound by finding the longest continuous carbon atom chain that also contains the halogen.
Add a prefix for the particular halogen atom.
The prefixes for each of the four halogens are fluoro- , chloro- , bromo- , and iodo- .
If more than one kind of halogen atom is present, put them in alphabetical order.
If there is more than one of the same halogen on a given carbon atom, use the prefixes di- , tri- , or tetra- before the prefix for the halogen.
As with hydrocarbons, number the carbon chain in a way that makes the sum of halogen numbers as low as possible.
If different halogens are in equivalent positions, give the lower number to the one that comes first in alphabetical order.
Add the numerical prefix into the name before the halogen prefix.
Separate numbers with commas and separate numbers from names or prefixes with a hyphen.
There are no spaces in the name.
Listed below are some examples of names and structural formulas of a few alkyl halides.
