The formula unit for cesium chloride is CsCl, also a 1:1 ratio.
However, as shown in the figure below, the coordination numbers are not 6 as in NaCl.  The center ion is the Cs + ion and is surrounded by the eight Cl − ions at the corners of the cube.  Each Cl − ion is also surrounded by eight Cs + ions.  The coordination numbers in this type of crystal are both 8.  CsCl and NaCl do not adopt identical crystal packing arrangements because the Cs + ion is considerably larger than the Na + ion.
Lattice structure for cesium chloride
In a cesium chloride crystal, the cesium ion (orange) occupies the center, while the chloride ions (green) occupy each corner of the cube.
The coordination number for both ions is 8.
Another type of crystal is illustrated by titanium(IV) oxide, TiO 2 , which is commonly known as rutile.  The rutile crystal is shown below.
Lattice structure for titanium chloride
Titanium(IV) oxide forms tetragonal crystals.
The coordination number of the Ti 4+ ions (gray) is 6, while the coordination number of the O 2 − ions (red) is 3.
The gray Ti 4+ ions are surrounded by six red O 2− ions.  The O 2− ions are surrounded by three Ti 4+ ions.  The coordination of the titanium(IV) cation is 6, which is twice the coordination number of the oxide anion, which is 3.  This fits with the formula unit of TiO 2 , since there are twice as many O 2− ions as Ti 4+ ions.
The crystal structure of all ionic compounds must reflect the formula unit.  In a crystal of iron(III) chloride, FeCl 3 , there are three times as many chloride ions as iron(III) ions.
Lattice structure for iron chloride
Iron(III) chloride.
The bluish-gray Fe 3+ ions are surrounded by green Cl - ions.
The coordination number of a compound is determined by the type and number of ions or other species surrounding a central ion.
Often the color of a compound is affected by the specific materials coordinated to that central ion.
Use the link below to answer the following questions:
What are the ions or molecules that bind to transition metal ions called?
How many complexes of CoCl 3 can be isolated?
What is a monodentate ligand?
