Glassware for running chemical reactions was developed.  Alchemy helped improve the study of metallurgy and the extraction of metals from ores.  More systematic approaches to research were being developed, although the idea of orderly scientific experimentation had not become well-established yet.  But the groundwork was laid to the development of chemistry as a foundational science.
The alchemists were never successful in changing lead into gold.  But modern nuclear physics can accomplish this task.  Lead is subjected to nuclear bombardment in a particle accelerator.  A small amount of gold can be obtained by this process.
However, the cost of the procedure is far more than the amount of gold obtained.  So the dream of the alchemists has never (and will never) come true.
Gold has been considered valuably by all civilizations.
The alchemists tried to find the philosopher’s stone that would allow then to make gold from lead.
Many dishonest schemes were created, but nobody ever made gold from lead.
The alchemists did contribute many advances to the new science of chemistry.
Answer the following questions using information from this link:
Where did the study of alchemy start?
Why did the medieval universities reject alchemy?
What was a major problem for alchemists?
Why is gold considered to be valuable?
Who owned the gold mines during the ancient Egyptian and Roman civilizations?
What is the elixir of life?
What contributions to modern chemistry were made by the alchemists?
alchemy :
The alchemists were a varied group of scholars and charlatans whose goal was two-fold: to create the Philosopher’s Stone (which caused the transmutation of lead into gold) and the discovery of the Elixir of Life (bestowing immortality on the person who possessed it).
The origin of the term “alchemy” is uncertain.
There are roots to Greek, Arabic, and ancient Egyptian words.
Three major streams of alchemy are known – Chinese, Indian, and European, with all three streams having some factors in common.
