In the case of measurements, we can only read our measuring instruments to a limited number of subdivisions.
We are limited by our ability to see smaller and smaller subdivisions, and we are limited by our ability to construct smaller and smaller subdivisions on our measuring devices.
Even with the use of powerful microscopes to construct and read our measuring devices, we eventually reach a limit.
Therefore, although the actual measurement of an object may be a perfect 12 inches, we cannot prove it to be so.
Measurements do not produce perfect numbers; the only perfect numbers in science are defined numbers, such as conversion factors.
It is very important to recognize and report the limitations of a measurement along with the magnitude and unit of the measurement.
Many times, the measurements made in an experiment are analyzed for regularities.
Since the reported numbers show the limits of the measurements (how specific these measurements really are), it is possible to determine how regular these measurements are.
Consider the Table below of the pressures (P) and volumes (V) of a gas sample and the calculated PV product.
Pressure × Volume (P × V)
Now, in the Table below ,  look at this same set of data when we are told that all the measurements have only two significant figures and all the numbers must be rounded to two places.
Pressure × Volume (P × V)
When the numbers are expressed with proper number of significant figures, a regularity appears that was not apparent before.
Rules for Determining Significant Figures
Significant figures are all of the digits that can be known with certainty in a measurement plus an estimated last digit.
Significant figures provide a system to keep track of the limits of the original measurement.
To record a measurement, you must write down all the digits actually measured, including measurements of zero, and you must not write down any digit not measured.
The only real difficulty with this system is that zeros are sometimes used as measured digits, while other times they are used to locate the decimal point.
Since this ruler is calibrated to 0.1 inches, we should estimate measurements to the hundredths place
In the sketch shown above, the correct measurement is greater than 1.2 inches but less than 1.3 inches.
