Many plasmids/vectors include selectable markers - usually some sort of antibiotic resistance ( Figure above ).
When cultures are grown in the presence of an antibiotic, only bacteria transfected with the vector containing resistance to that antibiotic should grow.
However, these selection procedures do not guarantee that the DNA of insert is present in the cells.
Further analysis of the resulting colonies is required to confirm that cloning was successful.
This may be accomplished by means of a process PCR or restriction fragment analysis, both of which need to be followed by gel electrophoresis and/or DNA sequencing (DNA sequence analysis).
DNA sequence analysis, PCR, or restriction fragment analysis will all determine if the plasmid/vector contains the insert.
Restriction fragment analysis is digestion of isolated plasmid/vector DNA with restriction enzymes.
If the isolated DNA contains the target DNA, that fragment will be excised by the restriction enzyme digestion.
Gel electrophoresis will separate DNA molecules based on size and charge.
Examples are shown in Figure below .
Gel electrophoresis is an analytical technique used to separate DNA fragments by size and charge.
Notice in Figure below that the "gels" are rectangular in shape.
The gels are made of a gelatin-like material of either agarose or polyacrylamide.
An electric field, with a positive charge applied at one end of the gel, and a negative charge at the other end, forces the fragments to migrate through the gel.
DNA molecules migrate from negative to positive charges due to the net negative charge of the phosphate groups in the DNA backbone.
Longer molecules migrate more slowly through the gel matrix.
After the separation is completed, DNA fragments of different lengths can be visualized using a fluorescent dye specific for DNA, such as ethidium bromide.
The resulting stained gel shows bands correspond to DNA molecules of different lengths, which also correspond to different molecular weights.
Band size is usually determined by comparison to DNA ladders containing DNA fragments of known length.
Gel electrophoresis can also be used to separate RNA molecules and proteins.
