Regulatory sequences controlling gene expression are associated with exon sequences.
The introns are usually excised (removed) during post-transcriptional modification of the mRNA.
Human cells make significant use of alternative splicing (see the Protein Synthesis concepts) to produce a number of different proteins from a single gene.
So even though the human genome is surprisingly similar in size to the genomes of simpler organisms, the human proteome is thought to be much larger.
A proteome is the complete set of proteins expressed by a genome, cell, tissue, or organism.
As stated above, our roughly 20,000+ genes are located on 24 distinct chromosomes.
So many genes are located on the same chromosome.
Chromosome 1 is the largest chromosome with approximately 246 million base pairs, whereas chromosome 21 and 22 are the smallest chromosomes, with just under 50 million base pairs each.
See
for additional information on each human chromosome.
Linkage refers to particular genetic loci , or alleles inherited together, suggesting that they are physically on the same chromosome, and located close together on that chromosome.
Two or more loci that are on the same chromosome are physically connected and tend to segregate together during meiosis, unless a cross over event occurs between them.
A crossing-over event during prophase I of meiosis is rare between loci that usually segregate together; these loci will usually be close together on the same chromosome.
They are, therefore, said to be linked.
Alleles for genes on different chromosomes are not linked; they sort independently (independent assortment) of each other during meiosis.
A gene is also said to be linked to a chromosome if it is physically located on that chromosome.
For example, a gene (or loci) is said to be linked to the X-chromosome if it is physically located on the X-chromosome chromosome.
The physical location of a gene is important when analyzing the inheritance patterns of phenotypes due to that gene.
The inheritance patterns of phenotypes may be different if the gene is located on a sex chromosome or an autosome.
This will be further discussed in additional Human Genetics concepts.
