This relationship is known as Boyle’s Law .
Boyle’s Law can also be written PV= \text{constant} at constant T .
As long as the temperature and the amount of gas remains constant, any variation in the pressure or volume will result in a change in the other one, keeping the product at a constant value.
Pressures are given in a multitude of units.
We've already discussed Pascals, and we know that another unit for pressure is the atmosphere (1 atm = 101.3 x 10 5  Pa).
The third commonly used pressure unit is the torr (symbol:
Torr). 760 torr is 1 atm, but 1 torr is also the increase in pressure necessary to cause liquid mercury to rise by 1 mm.
For that reason, torr is also commonly referred to as "millimeters mercury." Another pressure unit commonly used in our everyday world is psi, or pounds per square inch, though neither psi nor torr are SI units.
Temperature also affects the volume of a gas.
Jacques Charles found that when the pressure is held constant, the volume of a gas increases in direct proportion to its absolute temperature.
This relationship became known as Charles’ Law .
V \propto T \ \text{at constant} \ P.
A third gas law, known as Gay-Lussac’s Law , states that at constant volume, the pressure of a gas is directly proportional to the absolute temperature.
P \propto T \ \text{at constant} \ V.
The kinetic-molecular theory assumes that there are no attractive forces between the molecules and that the volume of the molecules themselves is negligible compared to the volume of the gas.
At high temperatures and low pressures, these assumptions are true and the gases follow the gas laws very accurately.
However, these three laws are true only as long as the pressure and density are relatively low.
When a gas is compressed to the point that the molecular volume is a significant portion of the gas volume, the gas laws begin to fail.  Similarly, when gases become so dense that the molecules begin to attract each other, the gas laws also fail.
These changes are expressed in the Van der Waals equations.
These three gas laws can be combined into the Combined Gas Law as follows:
