Since then, genetics and molecular biology have become core aspects of evolutionary biology.
Currently the study of evolutionary biology involves scientists from fields as diverse as biochemistry, ecology, genetics and physiology, and evolutionary concepts are used in even more distant disciplines such as psychology, medicine, philosophy and computer science.
Misconceptions About Evolution
The following list includes some common misconceptions about evolution.
The term evolution describes the changes that occur in populations of living organisms over time.
Describing these changes does not address the origin of life.
The two are commonly and mistakenly confused.
Biological evolution likewise says nothing about cosmology, the Big Bang, or where the universe, galaxy, solar system, or Earth came from.
Humans did not evolve from chimpanzees or any other modern ape; instead they share a common ancestor that existed around 7 million years ago.
The process of evolution is not necessarily slow.
Millions of years are not required to see evolution in action.
Indeed, it has been observed multiple times under both controlled laboratory conditions and in nature.
Evolution is not a progression from "lower" to "higher" forms of life, and it does not increase in complexity.
For example, bacteria have simpler structures and a smaller amount of genetic material than humans do.
This does not mean however, that bacteria are “less evolved” than humans are.
Bacteria have evolved over many millions of years and are well adapted to their own environments.
Since Darwin's time, scientists have gathered a more complete fossil record, including microorganisms and chemical fossils.
These fossils have supported and added more information to Darwin's theories.
However, the age of the Earth is now held to be much older than Darwin thought.
Researchers have also uncovered some of the preliminary mysteries of the mechanism of heredity as carried out through genetics and DNA, which were areas unknown to Darwin.
