Complementary Base Pairs
The double helical nature of DNA, together with the findings of Chargaff, demonstrated the base-pairing nature of the bases.
Adenine always pairs with thymine, and guanine always pairs with cytosine ( Figure below ).
Because of this complementary nature of DNA, the bases on one strand determine the bases on the other strand.
These complementary base pairs explain why the amounts of guanine and cytosine are present in equal amounts, as are the amounts of adenine and thymine.
Adenine and guanine are known as purines .
These bases consist of two ring structures.
Purines make up one of the two groups of nitrogenous bases.
Thymine and cytosine are pyrimidines , which have just one ring structure.
By having a purine always combine with a pyrimidine in the DNA double helix, the distance between the two sugar-phosphate backbones is constant, maintaining the uniform shape of the DNA molecule.
The two strands in the DNA backbone run in "anti-parallel" directions to each other.
That is, one of the DNA strands is built in the 5' → 3' direction, while the complementary strand is built in the 3' → 5' direction.
In the DNA backbone, the sugars are joined together by phosphate groups that form bonds between the third and fifth carbon atoms of adjacent sugars.
In a double helix, the direction of the nucleotides in one strand is opposite to their direction in the other strand. 5' and 3' each mark one end of a strand.
A strand running in the 5' → 3' direction that has adenine will pair with base thymine on the complementary strand running in 3' → 5' direction.
The base-pairing nature of DNA.
Adenine always pairs with thymine, and they are held together with two hydrogen bonds.
The guanine-cytosine base pair is held together with three hydrogen bonds.
Note that one sugar-phosphate backbone is in the 5’ → 3’ direction, with the other strand in the opposite 3’ → 5’ orientation.
Notice that the 5'-end begins with a free (not attached to the sugar of another nucleotide) phosphate group, while the 3'-end has a free (not attached to the phosphate group of another nucleotide) deoxyribose sugar.
