Newton’s Third Law of Motion
Where do forces come from?
Observations suggest that a force applied to an object is always applied by another object.
A hammer strikes a nail, a car pulls a trailer, and a person pushes a grocery cart.
Newton realized that forces are not so one-sided.
When the hammer exerts a force on the nail, the nail also exerts a force on the hammer—after all, the hammer comes to rest after the interaction.
This led to Newton’s Third Law of Motion , which states that whenever one object exerts a force on a second object, the second object also exerts a force on the first object, equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
This law is sometimes paraphrased as: “For every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.” A very important point to remember is that the two forces are on different objects—never on the same object.
It is frequently the case that one of the objects moves as a result of the force applied but the motion of the other object in the opposite direction is not apparent.
Consider the situation where an ice skater is standing at the edge of the skating rink holding on to the side rail.
If the skater exerts a force on the rail, the rail is held in place with tremendous friction and therefore, will not move in any noticeable way.
The skater, on the other hand, had little friction with the ice, and therefore will be accelerated in the direction opposite of her original push.
This is the process people use to jump up into the air.
The person's feet exert force on the ground and the ground exerts an equal and opposite force on the person's feet.
The force on the feet is sufficient to raise the person off the ground.
The force on the ground has little effect because the Earth is so large.
One of the accelerations is visible but the other is not visible.
A case where the reaction motion due to the reaction force is visible is the case of a person throwing a heavy object out of a small boat, such as a kayak.
The object is accelerated in one direction and the boat is accelerated in the opposite direction.
In this case, both the motion of the object is visible and the motion of the boat in the opposite direction is also visible.
