To ensure this, in addition to the cell performing its necessary functions, the DNA must be copied, as must many organelles, prior to cell division.
The life of a eukaryotic cell is a cycle, known as the cell cycle ( Figure below ).
The cell cycle is a repeating series of cellular growth and division.
The cell cycle has four phases: the first growth (G 1 ) phase, the synthesis (S) phase, the second growth (G 2 ) phase, and the mitotic ( mitosis ) phase, which ends with cytokinesis .
The cell spends the majority of the cycle in the first three phases of the cycle, collectively known as interphase .
After cytokinesis, two genetically identical daughter cells are formed.
Progression of the cycle into each phase is dependent on the completion of the previous phase.
Cells that have temporarily or reversibly stopped dividing are said to have entered the resting phase or the G 0 phase, a indefinite phase of quiescence.
The cell cycle is a vital process by which a zygote develops into a mature organism, as well as the process by which hair, skin, blood cells, and some internal organs consistently regenerated.
After cytokinesis, each resulting daughter cell is in G 1 of the next cell cycle.  has an excellent animation of the cell cycle.
This diagram represents the cell cycle in eukaryotes.
The cell cycle depicts the life of an eukaryotic cell.
The cell cycle has four phases: the first growth or gap (G 1 ) phase, the synthesis (S) phase, the second growth or gap (G 2 ) phase and the mitotic (M) phase.
The M phase includes mitosis and cytokinesis.
The cell spends the majority of the cycle in the first three phases (G 1 , S, G 2 ) of the cycle, collectively known as interphase.
After cytokinesis, two genetically identical daughter cells are formed.
The cell spends most of its life in the first gap (sometimes referred to as growth) phase, G 1 .
During this phase, a cell undergoes rapid growth and the cell performs its routine functions.
During this phase the biosynthetic and metabolic activities of the cell occur at a high rate.
The synthesis of amino acids and hundreds of thousands or millions of proteins that are required by the cell occurs during this phase.
