A lot of research is done by petroleum companies.  They want to find better ways to power vehicles, better lubricants to cut down on engine wear, and better ways to lower air pollution.  These companies will use information that is readily available to come up with new products.
A gasoline pump
Some “In-Between” Examples
Sometimes it is hard to differentiate between pure and applied research.  What may start out as simply asking a question may result is some very useful information.  If scientists are studying the biochemistry of a microorganism that causes a disease, they may soon find information that would suggest a way to make a chemical that would inactivate the microorganism.  The compound could be used to learn more about the biochemistry, but could also be used to cure the disease.
Hemoglobin is a protein in red blood cells that transports oxygen in the bloodstream.  Scientists studied hemoglobin simply to learn how it worked.  Out of this research came an understanding of how the protein changes shape when oxygen attaches to it.  This information was then applied to help patients with sickle cell anemia, a disorder caused by an abnormal hemoglobin structure that makes hemoglobin molecules clump up when oxygen leaves the protein.  Basic knowledge of protein structure led to an improved understanding of a wide-spread disease and opened the door for development of treatments.
Pure research focuses on understanding basic properties and processes.
Applied research focuses on the use of information to create useful materials.
Sometimes there is no clear line between pure and applied research.
Use this resource to answer the following questions:
Learning About Sickle Cell Disease at
What happens to red cells in sickle cell patients when the hemoglobin loses oxygen?
What is the difference between sickle cell trait and sickle cell disease?
List three treatments used for sickle cell disease.
What is the test for sickle cell disease?
What is pure research?
What is applied research?
Give one example of pure research.
Give on example of applied research.
Is it always easy to classify research as pure or applied?
Explain your answer.
