In old science fiction stories (1950s), one of the space travel themes was the use of solar sails for propulsion.
The idea was that the photon pressure from the sun would push the sail (like the wind sails) and move the space craft.
What once was science fiction is now reality as solar sails are being developed and tested for modern space travel.
Photoelectric Effect and the Particle Nature of Light
In 1905 Albert Einstein (1879-1955) proposed that light be described as quanta of energy that behave as particles.
A photon is a particle of electromagnetic radiation that has zero mass and carries a quantum of energy.
The energy of photons of light is quantized according to the  E=hv equation.
For many years light had been described using only wave concepts, and scientists trained in classical physics found this wave-particle duality of light to be a difficult idea to accept.
A key experiment that was explained by Einstein using light’s particle nature was called the photoelectric effect.
The photoelectric effect is a phenomenon that occurs when light shined onto a metal surface causes the ejection of electrons from that metal.
It was observed that only certain frequencies of light are able to cause the ejection of electrons.
If the frequency of the incident light is too low (red light, for example), then no electrons were ejected even if the intensity of the light was very high or it was shone onto the surface for a long time.
If the frequency of the light was higher (green light, for example), then electrons were able to be ejected from the metal surface even if the intensity of the light was very low or it was shone for only a short time.
This minimum frequency needed to cause electron ejection is referred to as the threshold frequency .
Classical physics was unable to explain the photoelectric effect.
If classical physics applied to this situation, the electron in the metal could eventually collect enough energy to be ejected from the surface even if the incoming light was of low frequency.
Einstein used the particle theory of light to explain the photoelectric effect as shown in the Figure below .
Diagram of the photoelectric effect
Low frequency light (red) is unable to cause ejection of electrons from the metal surface.
At or above the threshold frequency (green) electrons are ejected.
