When the high-energy bond between phosphate groups in ATP breaks, its chemical energy can do cellular work.
The bonds between phosphate groups can be broken and reformed, recycling this cellular energy.
The source of energy for re-attaching the phosphate and making ATP is the chemical energy in glucose.
Materials cycle and recycle, but energy gets used up and must be replaced.
That is the key to understanding cellular respiration: it is a "recharging of the batteries" - ATP molecules – which power cellular work.
How many ATP can be made by harnessing the energy in a single glucose molecule?
Although this number varies under certain conditions, most cells can capture enough energy from one molecule of glucose to build 38 molecules of ATP.
Our equation becomes:
This equation for cellular respiration is not quite complete, however, because we can easily mix air and glucose sugar (even adding ADP and P i ) and nothing will happen.
For the campfire, we indicated above the arrow that a necessary condition was a spark or match to start the reaction.
A spark or match would damage or destroy living tissue.
What necessary condition initiates the slow burn that is cellular respiration?
Recall that enzymes are highly specific proteins which "speed up" or catalyze chemical reactions in living cells.
More than 20 different enzymes are necessary to carry out cellular respiration.
Recall also that membranes within organelles often sequence enzymes for efficiency, as in chloroplasts for photosynthesis, you will not be surprised that a specific organelle, the mitochondrion ( Figure below ), is also a necessary condition of cellular respiration - at least in eukaryotes.
Illustration of an animal cell in cross section
Mitochondria, shown here as the green ovals in this animal cell, are membranous organelles which sequence enzyme and electron carrier molecules to make cellular respiration highly efficient.
Mitochondria have both an inner and outer membrane, with a matrix inside the inner membrane.
The inner membrane has many internal folds, increasing the surface area for proteins and molecules involved in cellular respiration.
Within each eukaryotic cell, the membranes of a few to a few thousand mitochondria sequence enzymes and electron carriers and compartmentalize ions so that cellular respiration proceeds efficiently.
