Stars that are reddish in color are cooler than other stars while stars that are bluish in color are hotter than other stars.
A white dwarf is a stellar remnant that is very dense.
A white dwarf's mass is comparable to the Sun and its volume is comparable to that of Earth.
The very low brightness of a white dwarf comes from the emission of stored heat energy.
White dwarfs are thought to be the final evolutionary state of any star whose mass is not great enough to become a neutron star.
Approximately 97% of the stars in our galaxy will become neutron stars.
After the hydrogen–fusing lifetime of a main-sequence star of low or medium mass ends, it will expand to a red giant which fuses helium to carbon and oxygen in its core.
If a red giant has insufficient mass to generate the core temperatures required to fuse carbon, around 1 billion K, an inert mass of carbon and oxygen will build up at its center.
After blowing off its outer layers to form a planetary nebula, the core will be left behind to form the remnant white dwarf.
White dwarfs are composed of carbon and oxygen.
A white dwarf is very hot when it is formed, but since it has no source of energy (no further fusion reactions), it will gradually radiate away its energy and cool down.
Over a very long time, a white dwarf will cool to temperatures at which it will no longer emit significant light, and it will become a cold black dwarf .
A red giant star is a star with a mass like the Sun that is in the last phase of its life, when Hydrogen fusion reactions in the core decrease due to the lack of fuel.
With the gravitational collapse of the core, the fusion reactions now occur in a shell surrounding the core.
The outer layer of the star expands enormously up to 1000 times the size of the Sun.
When the Sun becomes a red giant, its volume will include the orbit of Mercury and Venus and maybe even Earth.
The increased size increases the luminosity even though the outer layer cools to only 3000 K or so.
The cooler outer layer causes it to be a red star.
After a few more million years, the star evolves into a white dwarf-planetary nebula system.
The Hertzsprung-Russell diagram (often referred to as the H-R diagram) is a scatter graph that shows various classes of stars in the context of properties such as their luminosity, absolute magnitude, color, and effective temperature.
