Once activated, MAPK transmit signals downstream to other protein kinases and gene regulatory proteins.
This cascade of reactions is typical of a signal transaction pathway.
Many of the genes and proteins involved in signal transduction pathways are interconnected to Ras.
Any mutation that makes Ras more active or otherwise interrupts the normal signal transduction pathways ( Figure below ) may result in excessive cell division and cancer.
In Living things share common genes at , Michael Wigler discusses his work on ras, and 1989 Nobel Prize awardees Harold Varmus and Michael Bishop discuss their work retroviruses.
Tumor Suppressor Genes
Tumor suppressor genes, as their name implies, normally suppress tumorigenesis.
When this process is disturbed, such as by a mutation, tumor suppression may not be inhibited as normal.
An example of a tumor suppressor gene is p53 , which encodes a 53,000 dalton (53kd) protein, The p53 gene is activated by DNA damage.
DNA may be damaged by ultraviolet light, and any damaged DNA may be harmful to the cell.
Mutations causing problems with any of the components of Figure below , may lead to the development of cancer.
So that damaged DNA is not replicated, the cell cycle must be temporarily stopped so that the DNA can be repaired.
The p53 tumor suppressor gene encodes a transcription factor that regulates the synthesis of cell cycle inhibiting proteins ( Figure below ). p53 often activates a gene named p21, whose protein product temporarily stops the cell cycle.
If the DNA can not be repaired, p53 activates other genes that lead to cell death, or apoptosis.
This prevents the cell from passing on damaged DNA.
If the p53 tumor suppressor gene is defective, as by mutation, DNA damage in the cell may accumulate and the cell may survive to replicate the damaged DNA.
The damaged DNA would then be passed to other cells through many cell divisions, and cancer could develop.
Signal transduction pathways.
Ras (upper middle section) activates a number of pathways but an especially important one seems to be the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK).
MAPK transmit signals downstream to other protein kinases and gene regulatory proteins.
