This alignment allows the spindle fibers to correctly pull the chromatids to either pole of the cell, resulting in separation of sister chromatids from a chromosome, see Figure below .
Chromosomes, consisting of sister chromatids, line up at the equator (metaphase plate) of the cell during metaphase.
Anaphase is the phase in which the sister chromatids separate.
The sister chromatids are pulled apart by the shortening of the microtubules of the spindles, similar to the reeling in of a fish by the shortening of the fishing line.
One sister chromatid moves to one pole of the cell, and the other sister chromatid moves to the opposite pole.
This process occurs when the proteins that bind sister chromatids together are cleaved, resulting in unattached identical chromosomes, essentially separate daughter chromosomes.
These separate chromosomes are pulled apart by shortening spindle fibers, and pulled toward the centrosomes to which they are attached.
At the end of anaphase the spindle fibers degrade.
At this time, each pole of the cell has a complete set of chromosomes, identical to the amount of DNA at the beginning of G 1 of the cell cycle.
Telophase is essentially the opposite of prophase and prometaphase.
The chromosomes begin to unwind back into chromatin in preparation to direct the cell’s metabolic activities.
A new nucleus forms around each set of chromosomes.
This is followed by cytokinesis, the division of the cytoplasm, resulting in two genetically identical cells, ready to enter G 1 of the next cell cycle.
The phases of mitosis are summarized in Figure below .
Mitosis in the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle.
Mitosis is the multi-phase process in which the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell divides.
In this diagram, prometaphase is not included as a separate phase, but incorporated into prophase.
This is a representation of dividing plant cells.
Cell division in plant cells differs slightly from animal cells as a cell wall must form.
Note that most of the cells are in interphase.
