Dalton’s theory was different from previous discussions of atoms because it had the weight of careful chemical measurements behind it.
Dalton’s theory went beyond just a philosophical statement that there are atoms.
Dalton’s theory proposed a number of basic ideas: 1) All matter is composed of indivisible, tiny particles called atoms, 2) atoms can neither be created nor destroyed, 3) all atoms of the same element are identical (have the same mass), 4) elements differ from one another because they have different types of atoms (different mass), 5) compounds are composed of combinations of different elements because the atoms of different elements are bonded to one another, and 6) chemical reactions occur when atoms in compounds are rearranged.
Dalton’s theory did not convince everyone immediately.
It did convince a number of chemists right away but several decades were required for all opposition to cease.
Dalton’s theory underwent a number of modifications in the next 150 years but many of its ideas are still part of the modern atomic theory.
In 1869, Dmitri Mendeleev ascertained that there were groups of elements which had the same (or very similar) chemical properties, the same valence, and similar physical properties and showed that the chemical and physical properties of the elements were periodically repeated.
His periodic table remains a major idea in chemistry today.
Discovery of Electrons and Radioactivity
During the investigation of the flow of electric current through gases, scientists discovered rays that were emitted from a cathode discharge tube and had the property of being deflected in electric and magnetic fields.
It was determined that these rays consisted of rapidly moving, negatively charged particles called electrons.
It was also determined that upon heating or illumination by light, metals emitted electrons.
Logically, neutral atoms containing electrons must also contain positively charged particles.
Thus, the indivisibility of the atom was disproved.
This was further emphasized by Marie Curie’s discoveries that through alpha and beta decay, atoms of one element could transmute into other elements.
Curie’s discoveries also determined that atoms of the same element may have different masses (isotopes) and thus the idea that all the atoms of the same element are identical was also lost.
Rutherford’s Planetary Model of the Atom
Now that it was known that the atom had component parts, a new model was needed.
In the model proposed by J.
J.
