If a substance is corrosive, it can eat through objects.
Many scientists have to work with chemicals that are corrosive or otherwise dangerous.
That's one reason that following safety precautions in the laboratory or field is very important.
Safety in the Life Sciences
There can be some very serious safety risks in scientific research.
If researchers are not careful, they could poison themselves or contract a deadly illness.
The kinds of risks that scientists face depend on the kind of research they perform.
For example, a scientist working with bacteria in a laboratory faces different risks than a scientist studying the behavior of lions in Africa, but both scientists must still follow safety guidelines.
Safety practices must be followed when working with the hazardous things such as parasites, radiation and radioactive materials, toxins, and wild animals.
Also, carcinogens , which are chemical that cause cancer, pathogens , which are disease-causing virus, bacteria or fungi, and teratogens , which are chemical that cause deformities in developing embryos, are extremely hazardous, and extreme care must be used when working with these items as well.
For example, scientists studying dangerous organisms such as Yersinia pestis , the cause of bubonic plague, use special equipment that helps keep the organism from escaping the lab.
A biohazard is any biological material that could make someone sick, including disease-causing organisms.
Therefore, a used needle is a biohazard because it could harbor blood contaminated with a disease-causing organism.
Bacteria grown in a laboratory are also biohazards if they could potentially cause disease.
Science laboratory safety and chemical hazard signs
Science laboratory safety and chemical hazard signs.
If you perform an experiment in your classroom, your teacher will explain how to be safe.
Professional scientists follow safety rules as well, especially for the study of dangerous organisms like the bacteria that cause bubonic plague ( Figure below ).
Sharp objects, chemicals, heat, and electricity are all used at times in laboratories.
Below is a list of safety guidelines that you should follow when in the laboratory:
