Asthma is obviously triggered under certain environmental conditions.
The classical twin design compares the similarity of identical and fraternal twins.
Scientists often study the effects of environment on phenotype by studying identical twins.
Identical twins have the same genes, so phenotypic differences between twins often have an environmental cause.
Twin studies help understand the relative importance of environmental and genetic influences on individual traits and behaviors.
Twins are a valuable source of information concerning the relationship between genes and environment.
As monozygotic twins (identical) share their nuclear DNA, their polymorphisms , the nucleotide differences that make their DNA unique, are common to the two individuals.
This means that any phenotypic variation, such as in height, intelligence, or any other measurable trait, is due to the environment.
What is different about the experiences of the twins?
What unique experiences might one twin have that the other twin did not have?
By comparing phenotypes of hundreds of twins, researchers can understand the roles of genetics, shared environment and unique experiences in the formation and development of specific traits.
Dizygotic twins (fraternal or non-identical) share only about half of their polymorphisms.
These twins are helpful to study as they tend to share many aspects of their environment.
As they are born in the same place, usually within a few minutes of each other, they share many environmental conditions.
They had the same in utero environment, they usually have a similar or the same parenting style during their childhood, and a similar or the same education.
Similarities during childhood usually occur with wealth, culture, and their community.
Modern twin studies have shown that almost all human traits are at least partly influenced by genetic differences.
Some characteristics, such as height, show a strong genetic influence, while other characteristics have an intermediate level of genetic influence, such as with intelligence.
Some characteristics have a much more complex genetic relationship, with evidence for different genes affecting different aspects of the trait.
Autism, with its wide spectrum of severity, is such an example.
