It is the second mutation in the tumor suppressor gene that could lead to uncontrolled cell growth and possibly cancer.
Gene expression, signal transduction, the cell cycle and oncogenes seem to have an interconnected relationship with each other inside the cell.
Both oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes play an important role in gene regulation and cell proliferation ( Figure below ).
As stated above, numerous oncogenes are involved in gene expression.
Signal transduction pathways are filled with proteins involved in ultimately altering gene expression (see the Cell Communication:
Signal Transduction (Advanced) concept).
Anytime one of the involved proteins is altered, such as when its gene is mutated, gene expression can be altered.
How Cancer Develops.
This flow chart shows how a series of mutations in tumor-suppressor genes and proto-oncogenes leads to cancer.
The products of proto-oncogenes are required for normal growth, repair and homeostasis.
However, when these genes are mutated, they turn into oncogenes and play a role in the development of cancer.
Proto-oncogenes may be growth factors, transcription factors, or other proteins involved in regulation.
A very common oncogene, ras , is normally a regulatory GTPase that switches a signal transduction chain on and off.
Ras and Ras-related proteins are products of oncogenes found in 20% to 30% of human tumors.
The transcription factor myc is an oncogene often seen mutated in Burkitt’s lymphoma, a rare type of lymphoma, a cancer of the lymphocytes.
Ras is a G protein , a regulatory GTP hydrolase that cycles between an activated and inactivated form.
When a growth factor binds to its receptor on the outside of the cell, a signal is relayed to Ras.
As a G protein, Ras is activated when GTP is bound to it.
The active Ras then passes the signal to a series of protein kinases, regulatory proteins that eventually activate transcription factors to alter gene expression and produce proteins that stimulate the cell cycle ( Figure below ).
One important recipient of Ras signaling is the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) .
