Just the splitting of glucose requires many steps, each transferring or capturing small amounts of energy.
Individual steps appear in Figure below .
Studying the pathway in detail reveals that cells must "spend" or "invest" two ATP in order to begin the process of breaking glucose apart.
Note that the phosphates produced by breaking apart ATP join with glucose, making it unstable and more likely to break apart.
Later steps harness the energy released when glucose splits, and use it to build "hot hydrogens" (NAD + is reduced to NADH) and ATP (ADP + P i → ATP).
If you count the ATP produced, you will find a net yield of two ATP per glucose (4 produced – 2 spent).
Remember to double the second set of reactions to account for the two 3-carbon molecules which follow that pathway!
The "hot hydrogens" can power other metabolic pathways, or in many organisms, provide energy for further ATP synthesis.
To summarize:
In the cytosol of the cell, glycolysis transfers some of the chemical energy stored in one molecule of glucose to two molecules of ATP and two NADH.
This makes (some of) the energy in glucose, a universal fuel molecule for cells, available to use in cellular work - moving organelles, transporting molecules across membranes, or building large organic molecules.
Although glycolysis is universal, pathways leading away from glycolysis vary among species depending on the availability of oxygen.
If oxygen is unavailable, pyruvate may be converted to lactic acid or ethanol and carbon dioxide in order to regenerate NAD + , ending anaerobic respiration.
Anaerobic respiration is also called fermentation , which will be discussed in another concept.
If oxygen is present, pyruvate enters the mitochondria for further breakdown, releasing far more energy and producing many additional molecules of ATP in the latter two stages of aerobic respiration - the Krebs cycle and electron transport chain.
We will explore these, too, in a later section.
A summary of glycolysis can be viewed at
Click on the image above for more content
aerobic respiration :
Cellular respiration in the presence of oxygen; produces 36-38 ATP molecules/glucose.
