These principles are widely accepted within the scientific community.
Although there is no fixed set of steps that scientists always follow during an investigation, and there is no single path that leads scientists to knowledge, there are certain features of science that give it a distinct way of investigating.
Scientific investigations examine, gain new knowledge, or build on previous knowledge about phenomena.
A phenomenon , is any occurrence that is observable.
It can be simply a burning match shown in the Figure below , as well as the structure of a cell and the prey of a lion.
A phenomenon may be a feature of matter, energy, or time.
For example, Isaac Newton made observations of the phenomenon of the moon's orbit, Galileo Galilei made observations of phenomena related to swinging pendulums and Charles Darwin made observations of unique plant and animal species.
Although procedures vary from one field of scientific inquiry to another, certain features distinguish scientific inquiry from other types of knowledge.
Scientific methods are based on gathering observable, empirical (produced by experiment or observation), and measurable evidence that is critically evaluated.
The combustion of this match is an observable event and therefore a phenomenon
The combustion of this match is an observable event and therefore a phenomenon.
The Scientific Method Video can be seen at
Click on the image above for more content
The scientific method is not a step by step, linear process.
It is a way of learning about the world through the application of knowledge.
Scientists must be able to have an idea of what the answer to an investigation should be.
In order for scientists to make educated guesses about the answers, they will base their guesses on previous knowledge, with the notion of extending that knowledge.
Scientists will often make an observation and then form a hypothesis to explain why a phenomenon occurred.
They use all of their knowledge and a bit of imagination in their journey of discovery.
A hypothesis is a suggested explanation of a question or problem, based on evidence that can be tested by observation or experimentation.
