Prior to 1900, scientists thought light behaved solely as a wave.
As we will see later, this began to change as new experiments demonstrated that light also has some of the characteristics of a particle.
First, we will examine the wavelike properties of light.
Visible light is one type of electromagnetic radiation , which is a form of energy that exhibits wavelike behavior as it moves through space.
Other types of electromagnetic radiation include gamma rays, x-rays, ultraviolet light, infrared light, microwaves, and radio waves.
The figure below shows the electromagnetic spectrum , which is all forms of electromagnetic radiation.
Notice that visible light makes up only a very, very small portion of the entire electromagnetic spectrum.
All electromagnetic radiation moves through a vacuum at a constant speed of 2.998 × 10 8  m/s.
While the presence of air molecules slows the speed of light by a very small amount, we will use the value of 3.00 × 10 8  m/s as the speed of light in air.
Picture of the electromagnetic spectrum
The electromagnetic spectrum encompasses a very wide range of wavelengths and frequencies.
Visible light is only a very small portion of the spectrum with wavelengths from 400-700 nm.
The Figure above shows how the electromagnetic spectrum displays a wide variation in wavelength and frequency.
Radio waves have wavelengths of as long as hundreds of meters, while the wavelength of gamma rays are on the order of 10 -12  m.
The corresponding frequencies range from 10 6 to 10 21 Hz.
Visible light can be split into colors with the use of a prism ( Figure below ), yielding the visible spectrum of light.
Red light has the longest wavelength and lowest frequency, while violet light has the shortest wavelength and highest frequency.
Visible light wavelength ranges from about 400 – 700 nm with frequencies in the range of 10 14  Hz.
Beam of white light broken up into a rainbow by a prism
A small beam of white light is (refracted) bent as it passes through a glass prism.
