Secondary spermatocytes then quickly complete the meiotic division to become spermatids , which are also haploid cells.
The four haploid cells produced from meiosis develop a flagellum tail and compact head piece to become mature sperm cells, capable of swimming and fertilizing an egg.
The compact head, which has lost most of its cytoplasm, is key in the formation of a streamlined shape.
The middle piece of the sperm, connecting the head to the tail, contains many mitochondria, providing energy to the cell.
The sperm cell essentially contributes only DNA to the zygote.
On the other hand, the egg provides the other half of the DNA, but also organelles, building blocks for compounds such as proteins and nucleic acids, and other necessary materials.
The egg, being much larger than a sperm cell, contains almost all of the cytoplasm a developing embryo will have during its first few days of life.
Therefore, oogenesis is a much more complicated process than spermatogenesis.
Oogenesis begins before birth and is not completed until after fertilization.
Oogenesis begins when oogonia (singular, oogonium), which are the immature eggs that form in the ovaries before birth and have the diploid number of chromosomes, undergo mitosis to form primary oocytes , also with the diploid number.
Oogenesis proceeds as a primary oocyte undergoes the first cell division of meiosis to form secondary oocytes with the haploid number of chromosomes.
A secondary oocyte only undergoes the second meiotic cell division to form a haploid ovum if it is fertilized by a sperm.
The one egg cell that results from meiosis contains most of the cytoplasm, nutrients, and organelles.
This unequal distribution of materials produces one large cell, and one cell with little more than DNA.
This other cell, known as a polar body , eventually breaks down.
The larger cell undergoes meiosis II, once again producing a large cell and a polar body.
The large cell develops into the mature gamete, called an ovum ( Figure below ).
The unequal distribution of the cytoplasm during oogenesis is necessary as the zygote that results from fertilization receives all of its cytoplasm from the egg.
So the egg needs to have as much cytoplasm as possible.
Maturation of the ovum
