Within plant cells or algal cells, chloroplasts organize the enzymes, chlorophyll, and accessory pigment molecules necessary for photosynthesis.
When the reactants meet inside chloroplasts, or the very similar cells of blue-green bacteria, chemical reactions combine them to form two products: energy-rich glucose molecules and molecules of oxygen gas.
Photosynthetic organisms store the glucose (usually as starch) and release the oxygen gas into the atmosphere as waste.
Let’s review the chemical equation for photosynthesis once more, this time at the level of atoms as in the equation below.
Look closely at its primary purpose: storing energy in the chemical bonds of food molecules.
The source of energy for food is sunlight energy.
The source of carbon atoms for the food molecules is carbon dioxide from the air, and the source of hydrogen atoms is water.
Inside the cells of plants, algae, and photosynthetic bacteria, chlorophyll, and enzymes use the light energy to rearrange the atoms of the reactants to form the products, molecules of glucose and oxygen gas.
Light energy is thus transformed into chemical energy, stored in the bonds which bind six atoms each of carbon and oxygen to twelve atoms of hydrogen – forming a molecule of glucose.
This energy rich carbohydrate molecule becomes food for the plants, algae, and bacteria themselves as well as for the heterotrophs which feed on them.
One last detail: why do “6”s precede the CO 2 , H 2 O, and O 2 ?
Look carefully, and you will see that this “balances” the equation: the numbers of each kind of atom on each side of the arrow are equal.
Six molecules each of CO 2 and H 2 O make 1 molecule of glucose and 6 molecules of oxygen gas.
The two stages of photosynthesis are the light reactions and the Calvin cycle.
Do you see how the two stages are related?
Life requires photosynthesis for fuel and for the oxygen to burn that fuel.
Since the Industrial Revolution (late 18th and early 19th centuries), we humans have relied on products of ancient photosynthesis for enormous quantities of fossil fuel energy.
And, knowingly or not, we have also benefited from photosynthesis to remove the carbon dioxide produced when we burn those fuels.
So it may not surprise you that biologists have studied this critical process in great detail.
Although photosynthesis may seem straightforward in this form, such simplicity is deceiving for two reasons.
