Diagram of increasing energies in atomic sublevels
Electrons are added to atomic orbitals in order from low energy (bottom of graph) to high (top of graph) according to the Aufbau principle.
Principal energy levels are color coded, while sublevels are grouped together and each circle represents an orbital capable of holding two electrons.
The lowest energy sublevel is always the 1 s sublevel, which consists of one orbital.
The single electron of the hydrogen atom will occupy the 1 s orbital when the atom is in its ground state.
As we proceed with atoms with multiple electrons, those electrons are added to the next lowest sublevel: 2 s , 2 p , 3 s , and so on.
The Aufbau principle states that an electron occupies orbitals in order from lowest energy to highest.
The Aufbau (German: “building up, construction”) principle is sometimes referred to as the “building-up” principle.
It is worth noting that in reality atoms are not built by adding protons and electrons one at a time and that this method is merely an aid for us to understand the end result.
As seen in the Figure above , the energies of the sublevels in different principal energy levels eventually begin to overlap.
After the 3 p sublevel, it would seem logical that the 3 d sublevel should be the next lowest in energy.
However, the 4 s sublevel is slightly lower in energy than the 3 d sublevel and thus fills first.
Following the filling of the 3 d sublevel is the 4 p , then the 5 s and the 4 d .
Note that the 4 f sublevel does not fill until just after the 6 s sublevel.
The Figure below is a useful and simple aid for keeping track of the order of fill of the atomic sublevels.
The diagonal rule for electron filling order
The Aufbau principle is illustrated in the diagram by following each red arrow in order from top to bottom: 1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, etc.
The Aufbau principle gives the order of electron filling in an atom.
It can be used to describe the locations and energy levels of every electron in a given atom.
Use the link below to answer the following questions:
