For example, they work with the circulatory system to filter blood, and with the urinary system to remove wastes.
The kidneys filter all the blood in the body many times each day and produce a total of about 1.5 liters of urine .
The kidneys control the amount of water, ions, and other substances in the blood by excreting more or less of them in urine.
The kidneys also secrete hormones that help maintain homeostasis.
Erythropoietin , for example, is a kidney hormone that stimulates bone marrow to produce red blood cells when more are needed.
They also secrete renin, which regulates blood pressure, and calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D, which helps maintain calcium for bones.
The kidneys themselves are also regulated by hormones.
For example, antidiuretic hormone from the hypothalamus stimulates the kidneys to produce more concentrated urine when the body is low on water.
In addition to filtering blood and producing urine, the kidneys are also involved in maintaining the water level in the body, and regulating red blood cell levels and blood pressure.
As the kidneys are mainly involved in the production of urine, they react to changes in the body’s water level throughout the day.
As water intake decreases, the kidneys adjust accordingly and leave water in the body instead of helping remove it through the urine, maintaining the water level in the body.
The kidneys also need constant pressure to filter the blood.
When the blood pressure drops too low, the kidneys increase the pressure.
One way is by producing angiotensin, a blood vessel-constricting protein.
This protein also signals the body to retain sodium and water.
Together, the constriction of blood vessels and retention of sodium and water help restore normal blood pressure.
When the kidneys don’t get enough oxygen, they send out a signal in the form of the hormone erythropoietin, which stimulates the bone marrow to produce more oxygen-carrying red blood cells.
The kidneys maintain homeostasis by controlling the amount of water, ions, and other substances in the blood.
Kidneys also secrete hormones that have other homeostatic functions.
Use this resource to answer the questions that follow.
