One useful way is to use flash cards.
You write down the vocabulary words, the foreign language terms, the math formulas, the chemistry reactions – anything you want to learn.
Then you sort these cards into categories, topics that go together.
This organization of information helps you see patterns in the material so you can tie different ideas together and make better sense of them.
The periodic table was first built using a set of cards.  With this strategy, Mendeleev could organize and rearrange material until patterns emerged.
Mendeleev’s Periodic Table
In 1869, Russian chemist and teacher Dmitri Mendeleev (1836-1907) published a periodic table of the elements.
The following year, German chemist Lothar Meyer independently published a very similar table.
Mendeleev is generally given more credit than Meyer because his table was published first and because of several key insights that he made regarding the table.
Portrait of Dmitri Mendeleev
Mendeleev was writing a chemistry textbook for his students and wanted to organize all of the known elements at that time according to their chemical properties.
He famously organized the information for each element on to separate note cards that were then easy to rearrange as needed.
He discovered that when he placed them in order of increasing atomic mass, certain similarities in chemical behavior repeated at regular intervals.
This type of a repeating pattern is called “periodic.” A pendulum that swings back and forth in a given time interval is periodic, as is the movement of the moon around the Earth.
Mendeleev's earliest periodic table
Mendeleev's 1869 periodic table.
In the Figure above , atomic mass increases from top to bottom of vertical columns, with successive columns going left to right.
As a result, elements that are in the same horizontal row are groups of elements that were known to exhibit similar chemical properties.
One of Mendeleev’s insights is illustrated by the elements tellurium (Te) and iodine (I).
Notice that tellurium is listed before iodine even though its atomic mass is higher.
