They function as a control switch in many cellular functions, turning a function on or off, and regulating other cellular processes.
Many times they are involved in activating a cascade of reactions.
Tyrosine kinases may be either membrane bound receptors, with an intracellular kinase domain, or they may be cytoplasmic kinases.
As their names imply, tyrosine kinases phosphorylate tyrosine residues and serene/threonine kinases phosphorylate serene or threonine residues.
Transcription factors are DNA binding proteins involved in the regulation of transcription, and GTPases are a large family of enzymes that can bind and hydrolyze GTP (guanosine triphosphate) to GDP.
All these processes are related in that they involve phosphate groups and phosphorylation activities.
The phosphorylation of a target protein usually is an initial step in a cascade of intracellular processes, and is normally activated under specific conditions.
If these processes are constitutively active, then homeostasis will be disrupted and detrimental phenotypes may result.
More on protein kinases can be seen at
Growth factors, or mitogens
Usually secreted by specialized cells to induce cell proliferation in the cell, nearby cells, or distant cells.
An oncogene may cause a cell to secrete growth factors that would normally not be secreted.
The oncogene will thereby induce its own uncontrolled proliferation, as well as the proliferation of neighboring cells.
It may also cause production of growth hormones in other parts of the body.
Receptor tyrosine kinases
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), HER2/neu
Receptor tyrosine kinases add phosphate groups to other proteins to activate or inactivate them.
Receptor kinases add phosphate groups to receptor proteins at the surface of the cell.
These receptor proteins receive signals from outside the cell and initiate a signal transduction process inside the cell.
Tyrosine kinases add phosphate groups to tyrosine residues in the target protein.
