DNA replication is said to be semi-conservative because of this process of replication, where the resulting double helix is composed of both an old strand and a new strand.
For an animation of DNA replication, see
DNA replication occurs when the DNA strands “unzip”, and the original strands of DNA serve as a template for new nucleotides to join and form a new strand.
The replication fork is obvious at the point of separation of the double helix.
The semi-conservative mechanism of replication was one of three models originally proposed for DNA replication:
Semiconservative replication would produce two copies that each contained one of the original strands and one new strand.
Conservative replication would leave the two original template DNA strands together in a double helix, with the new DNA composed entirely of two new strands.
Dispersive replication would produce two copies of the DNA, both containing a mixture of old and new material.
Of these three models, the semi-conservative model seemed most reasonable since it would allow each new daughter strand to remain associated with its template strand.
The semiconservative model was confirmed by the Meselson-Stahl experiment.
DNA replication is a semi-conservative process.
Half of the parent DNA molecule is conserved in each of the two daughter DNA molecules.
The Meselson-Stahl Experiment
In 1958, Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl identified evidence that supported the hypothesis that DNA replication was semiconservative.
The experiment took advantage of the fact that nitrogen is a major constituent of DNA, and that two forms of nitrogen are available: 14 N and a heavier isotope, 15 N.
The DNA of cells grown in 15 N medium have a higher density than cells grown in normal 14 N medium.
The experiment was performed as follows:
E. coli were grown for several generations in a medium with 15 N.
After that, E. coli cells with only 15 N in their DNA were transferred to a 14 N medium and were allowed to divide.
After one round of replication, DNA was isolated and was compared to pure 14 N DNA and 15 N DNA.
