The spindle plays an essential role moving chromosomes and in the separation of sister chromatids.
The spindle starts to form during prophase of mitosis.
Kinetochores on the spindle attach to the centromeres of sister chromatids.
As plant cells have some structural differences compared to an animal cell, an additional stage prior to prophase is necessary.
In plant cells only, prophase is preceded by a preprophase stage.
Plant cells have a large central vacuole encompassing the center of the cell.
Prior to the division of the nucleus, the nucleus must migrate to the center of the plant cell.
To accomplish this, the cell forms a phragmosome , a sheet of cytoplasm that bisects the middle of the cell.
The phragmosome suspends the cell nucleus in the center of the cell in preparation for prophase.
Additionally, during this phase the plane of cell division is established.
The accurate control of division planes, which establishes the placement of the future cell wall, is crucial for the correct structure of plant tissues and organs.
The mitotic spindle also starts to form during preprophase in plant cells.
Unlike animal cells, plant cells do not have centrosomes to organize their mitotic spindles.
Instead, in these cells, the nuclear envelope acts as a microtubule organizing center (MTOC) for spindle formation.
The preprophase spindle forms by self-assembly of microtubules in the cytoplasm surrounding the nuclear envelope.
During early prometaphase , the nuclear membrane disintegrates and microtubule spindles invade the center of the cell.
Also during this phase, the spindle attaches to the centromere of each chromatid.
Specifically, the spindle attaches to the kinetochore , a protein structure on the centromere where the spindle fibers attach.
During metaphase , the centromeres of the chromosomes line up along the metaphase plate or equatorial plane, in essence the approximate middle of the cell.
This orientation of the chromosomes at the equator of the cell helps to ensure proper chromosome separation.
