Portland was the first city to require that all gasoline sold within the city limits contain at least 10% ethanol.
By mid-2006, nearly 6 million “flex-fuel” vehicles – which can use gasoline blends up to 85% ethanol (E85 – Figure below ) were traveling US roads.
This “new” industry employs an “old” crew of yeast and bacteria to make ethanol by an even older biochemical pathway – alcoholic fermentation .
Alcoholic fermentation is a biochemical process in which sugars such as glucose, fructose, and sucrose are converted into small amounts of ATP, producing ethanol and carbon dioxide during the process.
Ethanol provides up to 85% of the energy needs of new “flex-fuel” cars.
Although its energy efficiency is still controversial, ethanol from corn or cellulose appears to be more “renewable” than fossil fuels.
Many people consider renewable biofuels such as ethanol a partial solution to the declining availability of nonrenewable fossil fuels.
Although controversy still surrounds the true efficiency of producing fuel from corn, ethanol is creeping into the world fuel resource picture ( Figure below ).
One of the newest kids on the block, ethanol from corn or cellulose is produced by yeasts through alcoholic fermentation – an anaerobic type of respiration.
You are probably most familiar with the term fermentation in terms of alcoholic beverages.
You may not have considered that the process is actually a chemical reaction certain bacteria and yeasts use to make ATP.
Like lactic acid fermentation, alcoholic fermentation, which is also referred to ethanol fermentation , processes pyruvate one step further in order to regenerate NAD + so that glycolysis can continue to make ATP, even in low oxygen environments.
In this form of anaerobic respiration, pyruvate is broken down into ethyl alcohol (C 2 H 6 O) and carbon dioxide.
C 3 H 3 O 3 (pyruvate) + NADH → C 2 H 5 OH (ethyl alcohol) + CO 2 + NAD +
Alcoholic fermentation produces ethanol and NAD + .
The NAD + allows glycolysis to continue making ATP.
Fermentation by Yeast
We have domesticated yeast ( Figure below and Figure below ) to carry out this type of anaerobic respiration for many commercial purposes.
Some yeasts, such as the baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, actually prefer fermentation over aerobic respiration.
These yeasts will produce ethanol even under aerobic conditions.
