Despite the great differences among labs, some features are common among them.
Most labs have workbenches or counter tops at which the scientist may sit or stand to do work comfortably.
This is important because scientists can spend all day working in the lab.
A scientist usually records an experiment's progress in a lab notebook, but modern labs almost always contain a computer for data collection and analysis.
In many lab's computers are also used for lab simulations (modeling or imitating an experiment or a natural process), and for presenting results in the form of graphs or tables.
Different fields of science need different types of equipment, such as the particle accelerator at left, found in a physics lab, and the fume hood, at right, found in chemistry labs, but also sometimes in biology labs.
View  to read about a flying DC-8 laboratory.
Lab techniques include the procedures and equipment used in science to carry out an experiment.
Lab techniques follow scientific methods; some of them involve the use of simple laboratory equipment such as glassware (shown on the shelves in Figure above ), and some use more complex and expensive equipment such as electrical and computerized machines such as the particle accelerator shown in Figure above .
Equipment commonly found in biology labs includes microscopes, weighing scales or balances, water baths, glassware (such as test tubes, flasks, and beakers), Bunsen burners, pipettes shown in Figure below , chemical reagents, and equipment such as centrifuges and PCR machines.
Pipettes are small, but important tools in many biology labs.
Micropipettes, such as the ones shown here, are calibrated to measure very small amounts of liquids.
For example, 100 microliters (100 µL) is about half the volume of your little finger tip; or even 1 µL, which is much smaller than a drop of water.
Microscopes are instruments used to view objects that are too small to be seen by the naked eye.
Optical microscopes , such as the one shown in Figure below , use visible light and lenses to magnify objects.
They are the simplest and most widely used type of microscopes.
Compound microscopes are optical microscopes which have a series of lenses: the ocular lens (in the eyepiece) and the objective lenses (close to the sample).
These microscopes have uses in many fields of science-- particularly biology and geology.
The scientist in Figure below is looking through a stereo microscope (notice the two lenses).
This type of microscope uses the two lenses to produce a three-dimensional visualization of the sample being examined.
