Severe Combined Immunodeficiency , or SCID, is a heritable immunodeficiency - a genetic disorder that cripples the immune system.
It is also known as the "bubble boy" disease, named after David Vetter, SCID’s most famous patient who lived for over 12 years in a sterilized environment, just like living inside a “bubble.” SCID affects about 1 in 100,000 live births.
These babies, if untreated, usually die within one year due to severe, recurrent infections.
Treatment options have improved considerably and include bone marrow transplants and gene therapy.
Children no longer have to live inside a bubble as did David Vetter, who was placed inside his sterile bubble about 10 seconds after birth.
He died 15 days after he left his sterile environment, due to an undetected virus in the bone marrow transplant.
David was one of the first bone marrow recipients.
More recently gene therapy has proved successful in treating SCID.
Insertion of the correct gene into cells of the immune system should correct the problem.
Trials started in 1990, and in 1999, the first SCID patients were detected with functional immune systems.
Due to some complications these trials had to be stopped, but these issues seem to have been resolved.
Since 1999, gene therapy has restored the immune systems of at least seventeen children with the disorder.
This raises great hope for other genetic disorders.
In your lifetime, it is definitely possible that many genetic disorders may be “cured” by gene therapy.
With this technique and its great possibilities, no one can predict what will happen in the future, but it could have profound effects on the future of medicine.
amniocentesis :
A prenatal diagnostic procedure in which a small amount of amniotic fluid, which contains fetal tissues, is extracted from the amnion or amniotic sac surrounding a developing fetus, so that the fetal DNA is examined for genetic abnormalities.
chorionic villus sampling (CVS) :
A prenatal diagnostic procedure which involves removing a sample of the chorionic villus (placental tissue) for analysis.
gene therapy :
