After one round of DNA replication, the resulting DNA was found to have close to the intermediate density between 14 N labelled DNA and 15 N labelled DNA.
Since conservative replication would result in equal amounts of DNA of the 15 N and 14 N densities, but no DNA of an intermediate density, the conservative replication model was excluded.
However, this result was still consistent with both semiconservative and dispersive replication.
Semiconservative replication would result in double-stranded DNA having an intermediate density, with one strand of 15 N DNA and one of 14 N DNA.
Dispersive replication would result in double-stranded DNA also of an intermediate density, with both strands having mixtures of 15 N and 14 N DNA.
The cells were then allowed to progress through another round of DNA replication in the 14 N medium.
DNA from cells after two replications had been completed was found to consist of equal amounts of DNA with both an intermediate density and a lower density.
This was inconsistent with the dispersive replication model, which would have resulted in a single density, lower than the intermediate density of the one-replication cells, but still higher than cells grown only in 14 N DNA medium, as the original 15 N DNA would have been split evenly among all DNA strands.
The result was consistent with the semiconservative replication hypothesis.
See A half DNA ladder is a template for copying the whole at  to see Meselson and Stahl talk about their work.
Helicase and Polymerase
DNA replication begins as an enzyme, DNA helicase , breaks the hydrogen bonds holding the two strands together and forms a replication fork .
The resulting structure has two branching strands of DNA backbone with exposed bases.
These exposed bases allow the DNA to be “read” by another enzyme, DNA polymerase , which then builds the complementary DNA strand.
As DNA helicase continues to open the double helix, the replication fork grows.
The two new strands of DNA are “built” in opposite directions, through either a leading strand or a lagging strand .
The leading strand is the DNA strand that DNA polymerase constructs in the 5' → 3' direction.
This strand of DNA is made in a continuous manner, moving as the replication fork grows.
The lagging strand is the DNA strand at the opposite side of the replication fork from the leading strand.
It goes in the opposite direction, from 3' to 5'.
