As the red ball moved around its path, at some times it would be moving clockwise and then for a short period, it would move counterclockwise.
This motion was able to explain the retrograde motion noted for some planets.
Astronomy and the Late Middle Ages
It was not until 1543, when Copernicus (1473 – 1543) introduced a sun-centered design ( heliocentric ), that Ptolemy’s astronomy was seriously questioned and eventually overthrown.
Copernicus studied at the University of Bologna, where he lived in the same house as the principal astronomer there.
Copernicus assisted the astronomer in some of his observations and in the production of the annual astrological forecasts for the city.
It is at Bologna that he probably first encountered a translation of Ptolemy’s Almagest that would later make it possible for Copernicus to successfully refute the ancient astronomer.
Later, at the University of Padua, Copernicus studied medicine, which was closely associated with astrology at that time due to the belief that the stars influenced the dispositions of the body.
Returning to Poland, Copernicus secured a teaching post at Wroclaw, where he primarily worked as a medical doctor and manager of Church affairs.
In his spare time, he studied the stars and the planets (decades before the telescope was invented), and applied his mathematical understanding to the mysteries of the night sky.
In so doing, he developed his theory of a system in which the Earth, like all the planets, revolved around the sun, and which simply and elegantly explained the curious retrograde movements of the planets.
Copernicus wrote his theory in De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium (“On the Revolutions of the Celestial Orbs”).
The book was completed in 1530 or so, but it wasn’t published until the year he died, 1543.
It has been suggested that Copernicus knew the publication would incur the wrath of the Catholic church and he didn’t want to deal with problems so he didn’t publish his theory until he was on his death bed.
Legend has it that a copy of the printer’s proof was placed in his hands as he lay in a coma, and he woke long enough to recognize what he was holding before he died.
Tycho Brahe (1546 – 1601) was born in a part of southern Sweden that was part of Denmark at the time.
While attending the university to study law and philosophy, he became interested in astronomy and spent most evenings observing the stars.
One of Tycho Brahe’s first contributions to astronomy was the detection and correction of several serious errors in the standard astronomical tables.
Then, in 1572, he discovered a supernova located in the constellation of Cassiopeia.
Tycho built his own instruments and made the most complete and accurate observations available without the use of a telescope.
