To most animals albinism would be a disadvantage since they need to blend into their environment to avoid predators or catch prey.
How, then, does the gene that causes albinism stay in the gene pool?
Evolution Acts on the Phenotype
Natural selection acts on the phenotype (the traits or characteristics) of an individual.
On the other hand, natural selection does not act on the underlying genotype (the genetic makeup) of an individual.
For many traits, the homozygous genotype, AA , for example, has the same phenotype as the heterozygous Aa genotype.
If both an AA and Aa individual have the same phenotype, the environment cannot distinguish between them.
So natural selection cannot select for a homozygous individual over a heterozygous individual.
Even if the "aa" phenotype is lethal, the recessive a allele, will be maintained in the population through heterozygous Aa individuals.
Furthermore, the mating of two heterozygous individuals can produce homozygous recessive ( aa ) individuals.
However, natural selection can and does differentiate between dominant and recessive phenotypes.
Since natural selection acts on the phenotype, if an allele causes death in a homozygous individual, aa , for example, it will not cause death in a heterozygous Aa individual.
These heterozygous Aa individuals will then act as carriers of the a allele, meaning that the a allele could be passed down to offspring.
People who are carriers do not express the recessive phenotype, as they have a dominant allele.
This allele is said to be kept in the population's gene pool.
The gene pool is the complete set of genes and alleles within a population.
For example, Tay-Sachs disease is a recessive human genetic disorder.
That means only individuals with the homozygous recessive genotype, rr will be affected.
Affected individuals usually die from complications of the disease in early childhood, at an age too young to reproduce.
The two parents are each heterozygous ( Rr ) for the Tay-Sachs gene; they will not die in childhood and will be carriers of the disease gene.
