The process begins with a molecule of glucose, which has six carbon atoms.
What happens to each of these atoms of carbon?
However, releasing energy within cells does not produce light or intense heat.
Cells run on chemical energy – specifically, the small amount temporarily stored in ATP molecules.
Cellular respiration transfers chemical energy from a "deliverable" fuel molecule – glucose – to many "usable" molecules of ATP.
Like oxygen, glucose is delivered by your blood to your cells.
If ATP were delivered to cells, more than 60,221,417,930,000,000,000,000,000 of these large molecules (which contain relatively small amounts of energy) would clog your capillaries each day.
Pumping them across cell membranes would "cost" a great deal of energy.
A molecule of glucose contains a larger amount of chemical energy in a smaller package.
Therefore, glucose is much more convenient for bloodstream delivery, but too "powerful" to work within the cell.
The process of cellular respiration uses oxygen to help transfer the chemical energy from glucose to ATP, which can be used to do work in the cell.
This chemical equation expresses what we have worked out:
As with burning, we must trace what happens to atoms during cellular respiration.
You can readily see that when the carbon atoms in glucose are combined with oxygen, they again form carbon dioxide.
And when the hydrogen atoms in glucose are oxidized, they form water, as in burning.
You can detect these products of cellular respiration in your breath on a cold day (as water condensation) and in the lab (BTB turns yellow when you blow into it through a straw).
This equation accounts for the energy transfer and the carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms, but it does not show the "raw materials" or reactants which build ATP.
Recall that the energy temporarily stored in ATP is released for use when the bond between the second and third phosphates is broken.
The resulting ADP can be recycled within the cell by recombining it with inorganic phosphate (P i ).
Like recharging batteries, cells recycle ATP and ADP (and AMP) molecules by combining them with inorganic phosphate.
