Make a guess why sound can easily travel around corners (Hint: think of its medium).
Some giant ocean waves have a wavelength of 25 m long, and travel at speeds of 6.5 m/s.
Determine the frequency and period of such a wave.
Bats use sound echoes to navigate and hunt.  They emit pulses of high frequency sound waves which reflect off obstacles in the surroundings.  By detecting the time delay between the emission and return of a pulse, a bat can determine the location of the object.  What is the time delay between the sending and return of a pulse from an object located 12.5 m away?  The approximate speed of sound is 340 m/s.
Sachi is listening to her favorite radio station which broadcasts radio signals with a frequency of 1.023 \times 10^8 \ \text{Hz} .  If the speed of the signals in air is 2.997 \times 10^8 \ \text{m/s} , what is the wavelength of these radio signals?
A longitudinal wave is observed to be moving along a slinky.
Adjacent crests are 2.4 m apart.  Exactly 6 crests are observed to move past a given point in 9.1 s.  Determine the wavelength, frequency, and speed of this wave.
A sonar signal leaves a submarine, travels through the water to another submarine and reflects back to the original submarine in 4.00 s.  If the frequency of the signal was 512 cycles per second and the wavelength of the signal was 2.93 m, how far away is the second submarine?
longitudinal wave:
A wave in which the direction of media displacement is the same as the direction of wave propagation.
Define the Doppler shift.
Explain the Doppler shift with sound.
Make calculations based on the Doppler shift.
Supersonic airplane generating sonic boom
At normal speeds, when an object generates sound, the sound travels away from the object and people hear the same sound that was generated by the object.
In some unusual cases, like this airplane, the object can travel as fast or faster than the sounds it makes.
The sound wave moves along with this airplane; as the airplane continues to generate more sound, this sound is added to the old sound.
When this extra large sound wave front arrives, the sound is much louder than the sound that was originally generated.
When this happens with airplanes, the sound is called a “sonic boom.”
If an emitted sound is moving at a significant fraction of the speed of sound relative to the receiver, it is possible for the sound emitted by a source and the sound received by a receiver to be different.
