A standard surge protector passes the electrical current along from the outlet to a number of electrical and electronic devices plugged into the power strip.
If the voltage from the outlet surges or spikes (rises above the accepted level) the surge protector diverts the extra electricity into the outlet's grounding wire.
The most common type of surge protector contains a component called a metal oxide varistor , or MOV , which diverts the extra voltage.
As you can see in the diagram below, an MOV forms a connection between the hot power line and the grounding line.
Diagram of a surge protector
An MOV has three parts: a piece of metal oxide material in the middle and two semiconductors that join it to the power and grounding lines.
These semiconductors have a variable resistance that is dependent on voltage.
When voltage is below a certain level, the electrons in the semiconductors flow in such a way as to create a very high resistance.
When the voltage exceeds that level, the electrons behave differently, creating a much lower resistance.
When the voltage is low, an MOV does nothing.
When voltage is too high, an MOV can conduct a lot of current to the ground line, thus eliminating the extra voltage.
As soon as the extra current is diverted into the MOV and to ground, the voltage in the hot line returns to a normal level, causing the MOV's resistance to shoot up again.
In this way, the MOV only diverts the surge current, while allowing the standard current to continue powering whatever machines are connected to the surge protector.
Essentially, the MOV acts as a pressure release valve, only opening when the voltage exceeds set values.
An electrical fuse is a device that sacrifices itself to provide over-current protection in an electrical circuit.  If too much current flows, the fuse wire rises to a higher temperature and melts, thus opening the circuit, but destroying the fuse.
A circuit breaker opens a circuit as soon as the current climbs to unsafe levels, and can be used repeatedly.
A standard surge protector passes a constant electrical current forward by diverting any extra electricity into a grounding wire.
Click on the image above for more content
Follow up questions:
What happens to the fuse wire when the recommended current in a circuit is exceeded?
