Kinase C (enzyme that helps mediate signal transduction cascades by hydrolyzing lipids)
phospholipases (hydrolyze various bonds in the the polar head group of phospholipids which are vital to the degredation of damaged or aged cell membranes)
hormone receptors (binds a hormone outside the cell membrane and activates a protein kinase inside the cell)
Glycoproteins and glycolipids, in particular, have a carbohydrate chain that acts as a label to identify the cell type.
Specifically, A, B, O blood groups result from having different carbohydrate chains on the cell surface of red blood cells and other types of cells.
Everyone has glycolipids and glycoproteins with the particular type of carbohydrate chain that signals type O.
However, people with type A also have an additional carbohydrate called N-Acetylgalactosamine and those with type B have an added galactose.
Those with type AB have some glycolipids and glycoproteins with N-Acetylgalactosamine added and others with galactose added.
Shown in Figure below are two different types of membrane proteins and associated molecules.
Some of the membrane proteins make up a major transport system that moves molecules and ions through the polar phospholipid bilayer.
integral membrane proteins :
Proteins that are permanently embedded within the plasma membrane of a cell or organelle.
membrane protein :
A protein molecule that is attached to, or associated with, the membrane of a cell or organelle.
peripheral membrane proteins :
Proteins that are only temporarily associated with the cell membrane; can be easily removed.
plasma membrane :
Thin coat of lipids (phospholipids) that surrounds and encloses a cell; physical boundary between the intracellular space and the extracellular environment; also called the cell membrane.
The plasma membrane has many proteins that assist other substances in crossing the membrane.
Membrane proteins may be permanently attached/embedded (integral membrane proteins) to the membrane, or just temporarily associated with the membrane (peripheral membrane proteins).
