When you make bread, you employ the yeast to make the bread “rise” by producing bubbles of carbon dioxide gas.
Ethanol is also produced.
Why do you suppose that eating bread does not intoxicate you?
Bread is not intoxicating because the bread fermentation process takes a short amount of time, only allowing for a small amount of alcohol to be produced, most of which will evaporate during the baking process.
A study was reported to the American Chemical Society suggesting that after collecting samples from bakeries and housewive's ovens, they found that the alcohol content varied from 0.04% to 1.9%.
The alcohol content of bread varies with the kind of yeast used, the time it sets, and the temperature of baking.
Yeasts (A) are facultative anaerobes, which means that in the absence of oxygen, they use alcoholic fermentation to produce ethyl alcohol and carbon dioxide.
Both products are important commercially.
Recall that yeasts are single-celled eukaryotic organisms that reproduce asexually (B).
We employ yeasts to use their anaerobic talents to help bread rise (via bubbles of CO 2 ) and grapes ferment (adding ethanol).
Brewers of beer and wine use yeast to add alcohol to beverages.
Traditional varieties of yeast not only make but also limit the quantity of alcohol in these beverages, because above 18% by volume, alcohol becomes toxic to the yeast itself.
Wine is produced by fermentation of the natural sugars present in grapes and other kinds of fruit.
Beer, whiskey, and vodka are produced by fermentation of grain starches that have been converted to sugar by the enzyme amylase, and rum is produced by fermentation of sugarcane.
In each of these fermentations, sugars are converted into small amounts of ATP, using and regenerating NAD + in the process, and producing ethanol and carbon dioxide.
Scientists have recently developed new strains of yeast which can tolerate up to 25% alcohol by volume.
These are used primarily in the production of ethanol fuel.
Human use of alcoholic fermentation depends on the chemical energy remaining in pyruvate after glycolysis.
Transforming pyruvate does not add ATP to that produced in glycolysis, and for anaerobic organisms, this is the end of the ATP-producing line.
All types of anaerobic respiration yield only 2 ATP per glucose.
