When higher kinetic energy molecules collide with lower kinetic energy molecules, kinetic energy is passed from the molecules with more kinetic energy to those with less kinetic energy.
In this way, heat always flows from hot to cold and heat will continue to flow until the two objects have the same temperature.
The movement of heat from one object to another by molecular collision is called conduction .
Heat is the energy that flows as a result of a difference in temperature.  We use the symbol  Q for heat.
Heat, like all forms of energy, is measured in joules.
The temperature of an object is a measurement of the average kinetic energy of all the molecules of the object.  You should note the difference between heat and temperature.
Heat is the sum of all the kinetic energies of all the molecules of an object, while temperature is the average kinetic energy of the molecules of an object.
If an object was composed of exactly three molecules and the kinetic energies of the three molecules are 50 J, 70 J, and 90 J, the heat would be 210 J and the temperature would be 70 J.
The terms hot and cold refer to temperature.
A hot object has greater average kinetic energy but may not have greater total kinetic energy.
Suppose you were to compare a milliliter of water near the boiling point with a bathtub full of water at room temperature.
The bathtub contains a billion times as many water molecules, and therefore has a higher total kinetic energy and more heat.
Nonetheless, we would consider the bathtub colder because its average kinetic energy, or temperature, is lower.
Temperature Scales:
Celsius and Kelvin
A thermometer is a device used to measure temperature.
It is placed in contact with an object and allowed to reach thermal equilibrium with the object (they will have the same temperature).
The operation of a thermometer is based on some property, such as volume, that varies with temperature.
The most common thermometers contain liquid mercury, or some other liquid, inside a sealed glass tube.
The liquid expands and contracts faster than the glass tube.
