What are the symptoms?
Do the symptoms get worse with age?
These and many more questions are where a genetic specialist, such as a genetic counselor can help.
Genetic counseling is the process by which individuals or their families who are at risk of an inherited disorder, are counseled on many different aspects of the disorder.
Genetic counseling may be necessary at any time throughout life, from before pregnancy to adulthood.
Before pregnancy, genetic counseling would be appropriate for at risk individuals who are planning a family, such as when one or both individuals are either carriers or have a certain genetic trait.
During pregnancy, genetic counseling is necessary for couples if the woman will be over 35 years of age at the time of delivery, if prenatal testing is recommended for any reason, or if an abnormality is noted on an ultrasound or other test.
After birth, genetic counseling is appropriate if a birth defect is detected.
During childhood, genetic counseling is appropriate if the child manifests any signs of developmental delay or a genetic syndrome, and in adulthood, genetic counseling is appropriate if signs of an adult onset genetic disorder is detected.
During genetic counseling, individuals are advised of the consequences and nature of the disorder, the probability of developing or transmitting the disorder, and the options open to them in management and family planning in order to make appropriate decisions.
In terms of the actual diagnosis of the disease, molecular analysis may be necessary.
Molecular analysis or testing is discussed in the Biotechnology concepts.
"Is it possible to test the developing baby for potential genetic problems?
Do you need to remove some of the baby's DNA?
How do you do that?"
These questions are appropriate for a geneticist.
Sometimes, to make sure the baby is developing properly, prenatal diagnosis is necessary.
Prenatal diagnosis refers to the diagnosis of a disease or condition before the baby is born.
The reason for prenatal diagnosis is to detect birth defects such as neural tube defects, chromosome abnormalities, genetic diseases and other conditions.
It can also be used to determine the sex of the unborn baby, though this can usually be determined by ultrasonography (ultrasound).
