Describe hybridization of electrons in sigma and pi bonds.
Like electrons, humans can't be put into the same place
How many people do you think are squeezed on this street?
Our minds can handle two electrons interacting with one another in a sphere of space.
But then we start putting in double bonds and triple bonds.
The way we draw these bonds on paper suggests we are squeezing more electrons into the same space, and that doesn’t work.
Electrons don’t like to be pushed together (especially since they all have negative charges that repel one another).
So we need a more complex picture that works for all these electrons.
Sigma and Pi Bonds
The hybridization model helps explain molecules with double or triple bonds (see Figure below ).  Ethene (C 2 H 4 ) contains a double covalent bond between the two carbon atoms and single bonds between the carbon atoms and the hydrogen atoms.  The entire molecule is planar.
Geometry of an ethene molecule
Geometry of ethene molecule.
As can be seen in the Figure above , the electron domain geometry around each carbon independently is trigonal planar.  This corresponds to sp 2 hybridization.  Previously, we saw carbon undergo sp 3 hybridization in a CH 4 molecule, so the electron promotion is the same for ethene, but the hybridization occurs only between the single s orbital and two of the three p orbitals.  Thus generates a set of three sp 2 hybrids along with an unhybridized 2p z orbital.  Each contains one electron and so is capable of forming a covalent bond.
Hybridization in ethene
Hybridization in ethene.
The three sp 2 hybrid orbitals lie in one plane, while the unhybridized 2p z orbital is oriented perpendicular to that plane.
The bonding in C 2 H 4 is explained as follows.  One of the three sp 2 hybrids forms a bond by overlapping with the identical hybrid orbital on the other carbon atom.  The remaining two hybrid orbitals form bonds by overlapping with the 1s orbital of a hydrogen atom.  Finally, the 2p z orbitals on each carbon atom form another bond by overlapping with one another sideways.
It is necessary to distinguish between the two types of covalent bonds in a C 2 H 4 molecule.  A sigma bond ( \sigma bond) is a bond formed by the overlap of orbitals in an end-to-end fashion, with the electron density concentrated between the nuclei of the bonding atoms.  A pi bond ( \pi bond) is a bond formed by the overlap of orbitals in a side-by-side fashion with the electron density concentrated above and below the plane of the nuclei of the bonding atoms.  The Figure below shows the two types of bonding in C 2 H 4 .
The sp 2 hybrid orbitals are purple and the p z orbital is blue.
Three sigma bonds are formed from each carbon atom for a total of six sigma bonds total in the molecule.
