The F 1 region of the protein has ATP synthesis activity, catalyzing the formation of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate.
Hence, ATP synthase is both an ion channel protein and enzyme.
The synthesis reaction is driven by the proton flow, which forces the rotation of a part of the enzyme; the ATP synthase is a rotary mechanical motor.
Bacteria may also have a version of this enzyme, where it, of course, is embedded in the cell membrane.
During electron transport within the mitochondria (during cellular respiration) or chloroplast (during photosynthesis) (discussed in the Concept Metabolism (Advanced) concept), a proton gradient is formed when protons are pumped across the membrane by active transport.
These hydrogen ions flow back across the membrane by facilitated diffusion through ATP synthase, releasing energy which is then used to convert ADP to ATP (by phosphorylation).
Chemiosmosis is the diffusion of protons across the biological membrane through ATP synthase, due to a proton gradient that forms across the membrane during electron transport.
ATP synthase :
Ion channel and enzyme complex; chemically bonds a phosphate group to ADP, producing ATP as H + ions flow through the ion channel.
chemiosmosis :
Process in cellular respiration or photosynthesis which produces ATP; uses the energy of hydrogen ions diffusing through ATP synthase.
chemiosmotic potential :
A difference in concentration of hydrogen ions across a membrane within the mitochondrion or chloroplast; established using energy from an electron transport chain; also known as a chemiosmotic gradient.
electrochemical gradient :
Difference across a membrane due to both a chemical force and an electrical force; drives the movement of ions across the membrane.
membrane potential :
The voltage difference across a membrane; the basis for the conduction of nerve impulses along the cell membrane of neurons.
oxidative phosphorylation :
A metabolic process that uses energy released by the oxidation of nutrients to produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
proton gradient :
