Conversely, moving two like charges apart will decrease the potential energy.
If the objects attract each other, the opposite situtations occur: if you pull them apart, you do work against the force, which increases the potential energy of the system, but bringing attractive charges closer together decreases the potential energy.
It is often easy to think of the change in energy as a mountain or an inverted cone, depending on the situation.
Imagine a positive point charge, with the corresponding electric field around it.
If you are moving another positive point charge, the situation is like a mountain, with the original point charge at the peak.
As the second charge moves towards the first, it must go up the mountain.
This requires work, and increases the potential energy of the system.
If, however, the second charge is a negative point charge, the two charges attract each other and the situation is like a cone: the second charge easily falls towards the first, decreasing the potential energy.
It would then require work to get the second charge up and out of the cone, away from the first charge.
Uniform Electric Fields
As we know from Coulomb's law, the electric field around a point charge decreases as the distance from the point increases.
However, it is possible to create a constant electric field between two large, flat conducting plates parallel to each other.
If one of the plates is positively charged and the other negatively charged, the space between the plates will have a constant electric field except near the edges of the plates.
Diagram of a uniform electric field created from two uniformly charged plates
A uniform electric field makes it easier to measure the difference in electric potential energy.
This energy, also called the electric potential difference  is commonly referred to as the voltage , based on the unit, volt (V).
To measure the voltage across some distance, it is necessary to pick a position to be the relative zero, because voltage is the change in potential difference.
Any point in a system can be given the value of zero volts, but it is typically the point of a point charge or one plate in a uniform electric field as shown above.
The voltage is measured using a voltmeter,  which measures the electric potential difference across two points.
The electrical potential difference between the two plates is expressed as V = Ed , the electric field strength times the distance between the plates.
