The sugar dissolves and the mixture that is now in the cup is made up of a solute (the sugar), that is dissolved in the solvent (the water).
The mixture of a solute in a solvent is called a solution .
Imagine now that you have a second cup with 100ml of water, and you add 45 grams of sucrose to the water.
Just like the first cup, the sugar is the solute, and the water is the solvent.
But now you have two mixtures of different solute concentrations.
In comparing two solutions of unequal solute concentration, the solution with the higher solute concentration is hypertonic , and the solution with the lower concentration is hypotonic .
Solutions of equal solute concentration are isotonic .
The first sugar solution is hypotonic to the second solution.
The second sugar solution is hypertonic to the first.
You now add the two solutions to a beaker that has been divided by a selectively permeable membrane.
The pores in the membrane are too small for the sugar molecules to pass through, but are big enough for the water molecules to pass through.
The hypertonic solution is on one side of the membrane and the hypotonic solution on the other.
The hypertonic solution has a lower water concentration than the hypotonic solution, so a concentration gradient of water now exists across the membrane.
Water molecules will move from the side of higher water concentration to the side of lower concentration until both solutions are isotonic.
What if the two solutions being compared are on either side of a cell membrane?
A hypertonic solution is one having a larger concentration of a substance on the outside of a cell than is found within the cells themselves.
A hypotonic solution contains a lesser concentration of impermeable solutes outside the cell compared to within the cell.
Osmosis is the diffusion of water molecules across a selectively permeable membrane from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration.
Water moves into and out of cells by osmosis.
If a cell is in a hypertonic solution, the solution has a lower water concentration than the cell cytosol does, and water moves out of the cell until both solutions are isotonic.
