RNA polymerase enzymes are essential to life and are found in all organisms.
In biochemical terms, RNA polymerase is a nucleotidyl transferase that polymerizes ribonucleotides at the 3' end of an RNA transcript.
While bacteria have one type of RNA polymerase, eukaryotes have multiple types, each responsible for the sun thesis of a distinct set of RNAs.
RNA polymerase I synthesizes a pre-rRNA 45S, which matures into 28S, 18S and 5.8S rRNAs which will form the major RNA components of the ribosome.
RNA polymerase II synthesizes mRNAs and most snRNA and microRNAs.
Due to the high level of regulation needed for proper transcription, a wide range of transcription factors is necessary for RNA polymerase II to bind to a gene's promoter.
These will be discussed in the Regulation of Gene Expression (Advanced) concepts.
RNA polymerase III synthesizes tRNAs, rRNA 5S and other small RNAs.
RNA polymerases IV and V synthesize siRNA in plants.
Initiation of transcription only occurs when all transcription factors are aligned along the promoter correctly.
Transcription factors are usually proteins that bind to the DNA sequence of the promoter.
Once all these factors are in place, RNA polymerase can begin transcription.
Transcription begins with the binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter of a gene.
An eukaryotic promoter signals the approximate start of a gene.
The promoter usually includes specific sequences that are recognized by transcription factors, which are proteins that aid in the binding of RNA polymerase to the correct place on the DNA.
The transcription initiation complex formed by the promoter, transcription factors, and RNA polymerase signals the start, or initiation, of transcription.
The DNA unwinds as the hydrogen bonds between the bases are broken, and produces a small open complex, which allows RNA polymerase to “read” the DNA template and begin the synthesis of RNA.
Initiation.
Notice that a set of transcription factors must bind to the promoter in the proper orientation prior to RNA polymerase (RNAP) binding and initiating transcription.
Soon after initiation the RNA polymerase must clear the promoter.
