For this reason, heterotrophs are also known as consumers .
Consumers include all animals and fungi and many protists and bacteria.
They may consume autotrophs or other heterotrophs or organic molecules from other organisms.
Heterotrophs show great diversity and may appear far more fascinating than producers.
But heterotrophs are limited by our utter dependence on those autotrophs that originally made our food.
If plants, algae, and autotrophic bacteria vanished from earth, animals, fungi, and other heterotrophs would soon disappear as well.
All life requires a constant input of energy.
Only autotrophs can transform that ultimate, solar source into the chemical energy in food that powers life, as shown in Figure below .
Examples of photosynthetic autotrophs
Photosynthetic autotrophs, which make food using the energy in sunlight, include (a) plants, (b) algae, and (c) certain bacteria.
Photosynthesis provides over 99 percent of the energy for life on earth.
A much smaller group of autotrophs - mostly bacteria in dark or low-oxygen environments - produce food using the chemical energy stored in inorganic molecules such as hydrogen sulfide, ammonia, or methane.
While photosynthesis transforms light energy to chemical energy, this alternate method of making food transfers chemical energy from inorganic to organic molecules.
It is therefore called chemosynthesis , and is characteristic of the tubeworms shown in Figure below .
Some of the most recently discovered chemosynthetic bacteria inhabit deep ocean hot water vents or “black smokers.” There, they use the energy in gases from the Earth’s interior to produce food for a variety of unique heterotrophs: giant tube worms, blind shrimp, giant white crabs, and armored snails.
Some scientists think that chemosynthesis may support life below the surface of Mars, Jupiter's moon, Europa, and other planets as well.
Ecosystems based on chemosynthesis may seem rare and exotic, but they too illustrate the absolute dependence of heterotrophs on autotrophs for food.
Energy flow in a food chain
A food chain shows how energy and matter flow from producers to consumers.
Matter is recycled, but energy must keep flowing into the system.
