Physical Properties and Intermolecular Forces
List properties of ionic and molecular compounds.
Explain differences in physical properties of molecular and ionic compounds based on types of intermolecular forces present in the compounds.
Intramolecular forces are very important in determining the physical properties of substances
Can you guess how much this is worth?
Carbon is an interesting and versatile element.
There are over twenty million known compounds containing carbon, encompassed in the growing field of organic chemistry.
The element itself can exist in two major forms.
Diamond is a form of carbon that is extremely hard and is one of the few materials that can scratch glass.
The other form of carbon is graphite, a very soft material that we find in “lead” pencils.
The two forms differ mainly in how the carbon atoms are connected to one another.
The differences in the arrangement of atoms affect the properties of the material.
Physical Properties and Intermolecular Forces
The physical state and properties of a particular compound depend in large part on the type of chemical bonding it displays.
Molecular compounds , sometimes called covalent compounds, display a wide range of physical properties due to the different types of intermolecular attractions such as different kinds of polar interactions.
The melting and boiling points of molecular compounds are generally quite low compared to those of ionic compounds .
This is because the energy required to disrupt the intermolecular forces between molecules is far less than the energy required to break the ionic bonds in a crystalline ionic compound.
Since molecular compounds are composed of neutral molecules, their electrical conductivity is generally quite poor, whether in the solid or liquid state.
Ionic compounds do not conduct electricity in the solid state because of their rigid structure, but conduct well when either molten or dissolved into a solution.
The water solubility of molecular compounds is variable and depends primarily on the type of intermolecular forces involved.
