Democritus’ Idea of the Atom
Describe how the Greek philosophers approached nature.
Describe the discussion about matter.
Describe the contribution Democritus made to our understanding of matter.
Picture of ancient Greek philosophers
What would the philosophers do?
People enjoy getting together to discuss things, whether it is how your favorite sports team is doing, what the best new movie is, the current politics, or any number of other topics.
Often the question is raised about who is right and who is wrong.
If the football game is to be played this coming weekend, all we can do is offer opinions as to its outcome.
The game has not been played yet, so we don’t know who will actually win.
The ancient Greek philosophers did a lot of discussing, with part of their conversations concerning the physical world and its composition.  There were different opinions about what made up matter.  Some felt one thing was true while others believed another set of ideas.  Since these scholars did not have laboratories and had not developed the idea of the experiment, they were left to debate.
Whoever could offer the best argument was considered right.
However, often the best argument had little to do with reality.
One of the on-going debates had to do with sand.  The question posed was: into how small of pieces can you divide a grain of sand?  The prevailing thought at the time, pushed by Aristotle, was that the grain of sand could be divided indefinitely, that you could always get a smaller particle by dividing a larger one and there was no limit to how small the resulting particle could be.
Picture of a sandy beach
Into how small of pieces can you divide a grain of sand?
Since Aristotle was such an influential philosopher, very few people disagreed with him.
However, there were some philosophers who believed that there was a limit to how small a grain of sand could be divided.
One of these philosophers was Democritus (~460-~370 B.C.), often referred to as the “laughing philosopher” because of his emphasis on cheerfulness.
He taught that there were substances called atoms and that these atoms made up all material things.
