In a new study, scientists may have unexpectedly detected a merger of black holes about 160 million light-years away in a galaxy dubbed NGC3393.
Using NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory, investigators have detected two black holes at its center, one about 30 million times the mass of the sun, and one at least 1 million times the mass of the sun, separated by only about 490 light-years.
They are the closest super-massive black holes to Earth ever seen, according to a NASA statement.
The scientists originally looked at this galaxy only to learn more about what they thought was the sole black hole at its center.
The General Theory of Relativity
In 1905, Albert Einstein published the theory of special relativity, a theory about space and time.
In the following years, Einstein worked on the fact that acceleration produced the same effect as gravitation.
For example, if you were in an accelerating spaceship, or just an elevator, you could not tell if the force on you was from inertia or gravitation.
While Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation works well for ordinary gravitational fields, it is inaccurate when the gravitational intensity is high.
Albert Einstein formulated the theory of general relativity in 1914 as a new way to explain gravity.
The classical explanation of gravity is that a force of attraction acts at a distance between two objects and the magnitude of the force is directly proportional to each of the masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between the objects.
The objects move toward each other due to this force of attraction.
Einstein’s new concept of gravity states that matter (mass) causes the space around the matter to curve and also distorts time.
A straight line through this curved space would also be curved in order to be a straight line.
Suppose we take a model of the earth in the shape of a globe and draw a straight line on the globe that travels from Kodiak Island, Alaska to the southern tip of Greenland.
This straight line passes northward of Hudson’s Bay, missing it entirely.
Line from Kodiak Island, Alaska, to Greenland on a spherical map of North America
Now suppose we take a map of Canada that has been flattened to exist in two dimensions and once again, draw a straight line from Kodiak Island, Alaska to the southern tip off Greenland.
This time, the straight line cuts right through the middle of Hudson’s Bay.
Line from Kodiak Island, Alaska, to Greenland on a planar map of North America
