After some time passes, equilibrium is reestablished with new concentrations of all three substances.
As can be seen in the Figure below , if more N 2 is added, a new equilibrium is achieved by the system.
The new concentration of NH 3 is higher because of the favoring of the forward reaction.
The new concentration of the H 2 is lower.
The concentration of N 2 is higher than in the original equilibrium, but went down slightly following the addition of the N 2 that disturbed the original equilibrium.
By responding in this way, the value of the equilibrium constant for the reaction, K_{eq} , does not change as a result of the stress to the system.
Adding more nitrogen in the Haber-Bosch process generates additional ammonia
The Haber-Bosch process is an equilibrium between reactant N 2 and H 2 and product NH 3 .
If more NH 3 were added, the reverse reaction would be favored.
This “favoring” of a reaction means temporarily speeding up the reaction in that direction until equilibrium is reestablished.
Recall that once equilibrium is reestablished, the rates of the forward and reverse reactions are again equal.
The addition of NH 3 would result in increased formation of the reactants, N 2 and H 2 .
An equilibrium can also be disrupted by the removal of one of the substances.
If the concentration of a substance is decreased, the system will respond by favoring the reaction that replaces that substance.
In the industrial Haber-Bosch process, NH 3 is removed from the equilibrium system as the reaction proceeds.
As a result, the forward reaction is favored so that more NH 3 will be produced.
The concentrations of N 2 and H 2 decrease.
Continued removal of NH 3 will eventually force the reaction to go to completion until all of the reactants are used up.
If either N 2 or H 2 were removed from the equilibrium system, the reverse reaction would be favored and the concentration of NH 3 would decrease.
The effect of changes in concentration on an equilibrium system according to Le Châtelier’s Principle is summarized in the Table below
