During this time the transcriptional process is unstable.
There is a tendency for the complex to release the RNA transcript and produce truncated unstable messages.
This is called abortive initiation and is common for both eukaryotes and prokaryotes.
This process can continue until the the transcription elongation complex is formed.
Once the newly synthesized mRNA transcript reaches approximately 23 nucleotides long, abortive initiation is no longer and issue and elongation will continue until termination.
This, like most of the remainder of transcription, is an energy-dependent process, consuming ATP.
Transcription elongation involves the further addition of RNA nucleotides and the change to a transcriptional complex.
As the RNA transcript is assembled, DNA in front of RNA polymerase unwinds by breaking the hydrogen bonds between the bases, and transcription continues.
As transcription progresses, RNA nucleotides are added to the 3' end of the growing RNA transcript.
The DNA template (non-coding) strand is read in the 3' → 5' direction, so the complementary RNA stand in created in the 5' → 3' direction.
This produces an RNA molecule from 5' → 3', an exact copy of genetic instructions in the DNA coding strand.
Of course the newly made RNA is composed of RNA nucleotides with uracil bases and ribose sugars.
The transcriptional complex has a short DNA-RNA hybrid, an 8 base-pair stretch in which the newly made RNA is temporarily hydrogen bonded to the DNA template strand.
Once the hydrogen bonds are broken, the RNA is released from the DNA transcription complex.
Unlike DNA replication, mRNA transcription can involve multiple RNA polymerases, allowing numerous mRNAs to be produced from a single copy of the gene.
This step also involves a proofreading mechanism that can replace an incorrectly added RNA nucleotide.
Elongation.
As RNA polymerase reads the template strand, the mRNA is synthesized.
Notice that a few of the RNA nucleotides are temporarily hydrogen bonded to the DNA nucleotides.
The termination of transcription in prokaryotes and eukaryotes is very different.
