Late in his life he was forced, under threat of torture, to publicly recant his Copernican views and spent his last years under house arrest.
Galileo’s life is a sad example of the conflict between the scientific method and unquestioned authority.
Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727), who was born the same year that Galileo died, would build on Galileo’s ideas to demonstrate that the laws of motion in the heavens and the laws of motion on the earth were the same.
Thus Galileo began, and Newton completed, a synthesis of astronomy and physics in which astronomy was recognized as but a part of physics, and that the opinions of Aristotle were almost completely eliminated from both.
Many scientists consider Newton to be a peer of Einstein in scientific thinking.
Newton’s accomplishments had even greater scope than those of Einstein.
The poet Alexander Pope wrote of Newton:
Nature and Nature’s laws lay hid in night;
God said, Let Newton be! and all was light.
In terms of astronomy, Newton gave reasons for and corrections to Kepler’s Laws.
Kepler had proposed three Laws of Planetary motion based on Tycho Brahe’s data.
These Laws were supposed to apply only to the motions of the planets.
Further, they were purely empirical, that is, they worked, but no one knew why they worked.
Newton changed all of that.
First, he demonstrated that the motion of objects on the Earth could be described by three new Laws of motion, and then he went on to show that Kepler’s three Laws of Planetary Motion were but special cases of Newton’s three Laws when his gravitational force was postulated to exist between all masses in the Universe.
In fact, Newton showed that Kepler’s Laws of planetary motion were only approximately correct, and supplied the quantitative corrections that with careful observations proved to be valid.
The Big Bang Theory
The Big Bang Theory is the dominant and highly supported theory of the origin of the universe.
It states that the universe began from an initial point which has expanded over billions of years to form the universe as we now know it.
In 1922, Alexander Friedman found that the solutions to Einstein’s general relativity equations resulted in an expanding universe.
