Many diet foods and diet soft drinks that contain the sweetener aspartame must also be avoided, as aspartame consists of two amino acids: phenylalanine and aspartic acid.
Supplementary infant formulas are used in these patients to provide the amino acids and other necessary nutrients that would otherwise be lacking in their diet.
Since phenylalanine is required for the synthesis of many proteins, it is necessary to have some of this amino acid, but levels must be strictly controlled.
In addition, the amino acid tyrosine, which is normally derived from phenylalanine, must also be supplemented.
Whereas cystic fibrosis, Tay-Sachs, and phenylketonuria are all autosomal recessive disorders, achondroplasia is an autosomal dominant disorder.
Achondroplasia is the most common cause of dwarfism in humans.
Achondroplasia is a result of an autosomal dominant mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor gene 3 (FGFR3), which causes an abnormality of cartilage formation.
FGFR3 normally has a negative regulatory effect on bone growth.
In achondroplasia, the mutated form of the receptor is constitutively active (constantly “turned on”) and this leads to severely shortened bones.
Individuals with achondroplasia are heterozygous for the mutation (one mutant copy, one normal copy).
Homozygous for the achondroplasia mutation is lethal prior to birth or shortly after birth.
For autosomal dominant disorders, a person with the disorder has a 50% chance of passing on the gene to their offspring.
For achondroplasia, this means there will be a 50% chance that each child will have achondroplasia.
Since two copies are fatal, if two people with achondroplasia have a child, there is a 25% chance of the child dying shortly after birth, a 50% chance the child will have achondroplasia, and a 25% chance the child will have a normal phenotype.
However, in 3 out of 4 cases, people with achondroplasia are born to parents who don't have the condition.
This is the result of a new mutation.
New achondroplasis mutations are associated with increasing paternal age (over 35 years).
Studies have demonstrated that new gene mutations are exclusively inherited from the father and occur during spermatogenesis.
More than 98% of achondroplasia is caused by a G to A point mutation at nucleotide 1138 of the FGFR3 gene, which causes a glycine to arginine substitution.
This makes this particular nucleotide one of the most, if not the most, mutable base in the human genome.
