The pea plant Pisum sativum has purple and white flowers.
These flowered plants are not just pretty to look at.
These plants led Gregor Mendel to unlock the secrets of heredity, beginning the field of genetics.
For his efforts, Mendel is widely known as the Father of Genetics, even though he knew nothing of the genetic material, DNA.
The laws he developed apply to all sexually reproducing life, and are the basis for beginning to understand many human diseases.
Mendel and the Pea Plant
Prior to Mendel's studies, it was commonly believed that offspring were a "mix" of their parents (the blending theory of inheritance).
For example, if a pea plant had one short parent and one tall parent, that pea plant would be of medium height.
It was believed that the offspring would then pass on heritable units, or heritable factors , for medium sized offspring. (Today we know these heritable units are genes; however, Mendel did not know of the concept of a gene or of DNA.) Mendel noted that plants in the monastery gardens sometimes gave rise to plants that were not exactly like the parent plants, nor were they a “mix” of the parents.
He also noted that certain traits reappeared after “disappearing” in an earlier generation.
Mendel was interested in finding out if there was a predictable pattern to the inheritance of traits.
Between 1856 and 1863 he grew and analyzed about 29,000 pea plants in the monastery garden.
It was Mendel's knowledge and use of mathematics in his studies that allowed him to analyze his results like no one before him.
Mendel may have chosen to study peas and pea plants because they are fast-growing plants that are available in different varieties.
For example, one variety of pea plant has white flowers, as shown in Figure below , while another variety has purple flowers.
But no variety has a pinkish-blend of the purple and white; there is no "middle" color of flower in this particular species, P. sativum.
Pisum sativum, the pea plant species that Mendel studied.
Mendel chose to study seven characteristics of pea plants.
A characteristic is a heritable feature, such as flower color.
Each characteristic Mendel chose to study occurred in two contrasting traits.
