Now, through mitosis and the miracle of development, we are made of trillions of cells organized into tissues, organs, and organ systems, which make us complex, amazing, active, individual beings.
None of us would doubt that we have changed significantly since we began as single cells.
Each of us has a unique identity that we keep throughout our entire lives, until death marks our end.
We may give birth to other individuals by producing eggs or sperm, but only if they join with other sperm or eggs to produce new, separate lives.
If, however, we lived like some plants, your father would not have produced the sperm cell destined to provide half of your genes, although there would be such a sperm cell.
Your mother would not have produced the egg cell destined to produce the other half.
In fact, your parents, and you, would not be distinguishable as male or female.
Instead, both parents (or maybe just one parent) would have released thousands of haploid spore cells, each of which would grow, by mitosis, into a new individual being, entirely different in form and habitat from its parents - and you.
Small spores would become males, and large spores females, but as if sperm and egg had decided to postpone their “marriage” and grow up on their own, these beings would live very different, “non-human” lives.
Who are these beings?
You are certainly not one of them, because you begin only when egg meets sperm.
Their differences from you would be far greater than the differences between tadpole and frog, or caterpillar and butterfly, because every individual butterfly or frog could (theoretically) identify exactly which individual caterpillar or tadpole it used to be.
Not so with these haploid creatures.
At some time during their relatively long lives, the male and female beings would produce sperm cells and egg cells by mitosis.
Fertilization would not involve mating, of course.
Depending on which kind of plant we chose as our model, sperm might swim on their own (with two or more flagella) from male to female being, or they might be blown by the wind, or carried by an animal.
After sperm and egg join, you would begin your life as a single cell, and grow into an “adult,” eventually producing your own haploid spores.
But you would never be able to identify your parents – if indeed you had two – nor would you know your children, because entire haploid lives would separate you.
Why do plants lead such complex, multiple lives?
Most of the plants you are probably familiar with produce flowers.
