Calculate any of the variables in the equation F = kx , when given the other two.
Understand the relationship between simple harmonic motion and circular motion.
A Foucault pendulum demonstrates simple harmonic motion
A Foucault pendulum is a pendulum suspended from a long wire, that is sustained in motion over long periods.
Due to the axial rotation of the Earth, the plane of motion of the pendulum shifts at a rate and direction dependent on its latitude: clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and counterclockwise in the Southern Hemisphere.
At the poles the plane rotates once per day, while at the equator it does not rotate at all.
Simple Harmonic Motion
Many objects vibrate or oscillate – an object on the end of a spring, a tuning fork, the balance wheel of a watch, a pendulum, the strings of a guitar or a piano.
When we speak of a vibration or oscillation, we mean the motion of an object that repeats itself, back and forth, over the same path.
This motion is also known as simple harmonic motion , often denoted as SHM.
A useful design for examining SHM is an object attached to the end of a spring and laid on a surface.
The surface supports the object so its weight (the force of gravity) doesn't get involved in the forces.
The spring is considered to be weightless.
Simple harmonic motion with a spring and block
The position shown in the illustration is the equilibrium position .
This position is the middle, where the spring is not exerting any force either to the left or to the right.
If the object is pulled to the right, the spring will be stretched and exert a restoring force to return to the weight to the equilibrium position.
Similarly, if the object is pushed to the left, the spring will be compressed and will exert a restoring force to return the object to its original position.
The magnitude of the restoring force, F , in either case must be directly proportional to the distance, x , the spring has been stretched or compressed. (A spring must be chosen that obeys this requirement.)
F = -kx
