The three most common protective devices are fuses, circuit breakers, and surge protectors.
An electrical fuse is a device that sacrifices itself to provide over-current protection in an electrical circuit.
Conducting wires have a small electrical resistance.
The electrical resistance of a conducting wire is related to the type of metal used and inversely related to the cross-sectional area of the wire.
The larger the diameter of a wire, the greater the cross-sectional area, and the lower the electrical resistance will be.
When electrons flow through a wire, they repel each other and interfere with the passage of other electrons.
If there are a very large number of electrons passing through a wire with small diameter, the electrons will experience a greater resistance than if the wire diameter were larger and the electrons had more space between them.
Close-up image of an electrical fuse
The image above is one type of electrical fuse.
This fuse has a specially designed wire inside glass housing.
The wire inside the glass is made of a particular metal and with a particular thickness to give the wire an exact resistance.
This resistance will allow passage of normal current plus a marginal percentage more.
If, however, the current exceeds the allowed value, the wire in the fuse will heat and melt, thus interrupting current flow through the circuit.
The fuse wire is placed in the glass housing and a fuse mount to insulate the melting wire from its surroundings.
Any unintended increase in current, such as short circuits, overloading, mismatched loads, or device failure will cause the fuse to burn out – protecting the other parts of the circuit from overheating and further damage.
This 'wire in glass' fuse is only one type of electrical fuse.
Most fuses consist of a wire with small cross-sectional area compared to the circuit conductors, mounted between electrical terminals, and enclosed in a non-combustible housing.
Regardless of the specific type of fuse, it is placed such that it carries all the current passing through the protected circuit.
If the current flow gets too high, the fuse will melt.
This destroys the fuse, but protects the remainder of the circuit.
