The plasma membrane engulfs the solid material, forming a phagocytic vesicle.
Pinocytosis or "cellular drinking," occurs when the plasma membrane folds inward to form a channel allowing dissolved substances to enter the cell, as shown in Figure below .
When the channel is closed, the liquid is encircled within a pinocytic vesicle.
Transmission electron microscope image of brain tissue that shows pinocytotic vesicles.
Pinocytosis is a type of endocytosis.
Exocytosis describes the process of vesicles fusing with the plasma membrane and releasing their contents to the outside of the cell, as shown in Figure below .
Exocytosis occurs when a cell produces substances for export, such as a protein, or when the cell is getting rid of a waste product or a toxin.
Newly made membrane proteins and membrane lipids are moved to the plasma membrane by exocytosis.
Illustration of the two types of vesicle transport, exocytosis and endocytosis.
Endocytosis and exocytosis are types of vesicle transport that carry very large molecules across the cell membrane.
For a detailed animation on cellular secretion, see
Axon signaling using exocytosis
Illustration of an axon releasing dopamine by exocytosis.
Some substances are internalized after binding to a membrane-bound receptor.
This process is known as receptor-mediated endocytosis (RME).
RME is a process by which cells internalize molecules by endocytosis.
This occurs by the inward budding of plasma membrane vesicles containing proteins with receptor sites specific to the molecules being internalized.
After the binding of a ligand to the plasma membrane-spanning receptors, a signal is sent through the membrane, leading to membrane coating by the protein clathrin , and formation of a membrane invagination.
The receptor and its ligand are then internalized in clathrin-coated vesicles.
RME is also known as clathrin-dependent endocytosis, named after the clathrin protein that accumulates on the internal segment of membrane that will form a vesicle.
