NF-1 = Nuclear factor I
Specificity Protein 1
Specificity Protein 1 , or Sp1, is involved in the early development of an organism.
Sp1 directly binds DNA through a zinc finger motif.
Sp1 binds to a regulatory sequence with the consensus sequence 5'-(G/T)GGGCGG(G/A)(G/A)(C/T)-3', which is known as a GC box element.
Sp1 was first identified in 1983, making it one of the earliest transcription factors identified.
It belongs to a family of transcription known as the Sp/KLF family (specificity protein/Krüppel-like factor).
Activator Protein 1
AP-1, activator protein 1 , is also one of the earliest transcription factors identified.
It activates the transcription of genes in response to a number of stimuli, including cytokines, growth factors, stress, and bacterial and viral infections, resulting in altered cellular processes such as differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis.
AP-1 is a heterodimeric protein composed of proteins belonging to the c-Fos, c-Jun, ATF and JDP families. c-Fos is a cellular proto-oncogene; it belongs to the leucine zipper family of transcription factors. c-fos gene products dimerize with c-jun gene products through the leucine zipper to form AP-1.
AP-1 activates transcription of genes containing the TPA DNA response element 5'-TGAGCTCA-3'.
TPA, or 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate is a phorbol ester, a potent tumor promoter known to activate the signal transduction enzyme protein kinase C (PKC) .
PKC describes a family of protein kinase enzymes that are involved in controlling the function of other proteins through the phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues on those proteins.
ATF and JDP are two other classes of proteins that may dimerize with for or jun to form AP-1.
ATF, activating transcription factor, is a class of AP-1 transcription factor dimers.
JDP, or Jun dimerization protein is a member of the AP-1 family of transcription factors.
CCAAT-enhancer-binding proteins , or C/EBPs form a family of transcription factors that bind to the CCAAT box motif.
They are characterized by a highly conserved basic-leucine zipper (bZIP) domain, which is used to form protein dimers.
C/EBPs are involved in different cellular responses, such as in the control of cellular proliferation, growth, and differentiation, and in metabolism and immunity.
