For long periods of time, they carry out aerobic respiration in their “specialized-for-endurance” red muscles.
If you are familiar with grouse, you know that these birds “flush” with great speed over short distances.
Such “sprinting” flight depends on anaerobic respiration in the white cells of breast and wing muscle, allowing rapid production of ATP in low oxygen situations.
No human muscle is all red or all white, but chances are, if you excel at sprinting short distances or at a sport such as weight lifting, you have more white glycolytic fibers in your leg muscles, allowing anaerobic respiration.
If you run marathons, you probably have more red oxidative fibers, performing aerobic respiration.
Ruffed grouse use anaerobic respiration (lactic acid fermentation) in wing and breast muscles for quick bursts of speed to escape from predators.
Lactic Acid Fermentation
You may have not been aware that your muscle cells can ferment.
Fermentation is the process of producing ATP in the absence of oxygen, through glycolysis alone.
Recall that glycolysis breaks a glucose molecule into two pyruvate molecules, producing a net gain of two ATP and two NADH molecules.
Lactic acid fermentation is the type of anaerobic respiration carried out by yogurt bacteria ( Lactobacillus and others) and by your own muscle cells when you work them hard and fast.
Lactic acid fermentation converts the 3-carbon pyruvate to the 3-carbon lactic acid (C 3 H 6 O 3 ) (see Figure below ) and regenerates NAD + in the process, allowing glycolysis to continue to make ATP in low-oxygen conditions.
Since there is a limited supply of NAD + available in any given cell, this electron acceptor must be regenerated to allow ATP production to continue.
To achieve this, NADH donates its extra electrons to the pyruvate molecules, regenerating NAD + .
Lactic acid is formed by the reduction of pyruvate.
Lactic acid, C 3 H 6 O 3 .
Lactic acid fermentation converts pyruvate to lactic acid, and regenerates NAD + from NADH:
C 3 H 3 O 3 (pyruvate) + NADH → C 3 H 6 O 3 (lactic acid) + NAD +
Lactic acid fermentation makes ATP in the absence of oxygen by converting glucose to lactic acid (through a pyruvate intermediate).
Making lactic acid from pyruvate oxidizes NADH, regenerating NAD + so that glycolysis can continue to make more ATP rapidly.
