How much energy per unit mass depends on the substance in question.
When you get out of the shower you often feel cold.
This is because the water on you is evaporating, and heat is flowing from you to the water droplets in order for them to change phase from water to gas.
You are losing heat and thus feel cold.
A calorie is a unit of energy.
The food Calorie, with a capital C , is actually 1,000 calories (a kcal).
Thus, for example, a snicker bar labeled with 200 Cal is actually 200,000 cal.
Food calories are determined by burning the food and measuring the heat released.
During a phase change, the number of degrees of freedom changes, and so does the specific heat capacity.
Heat capacity can also depend on temperature within a given phase, but many substances, under constant pressure, exhibit a constant specific heat over a wide range of temperatures.
For instance, look at the graph of temperature vs heat input for a mole (  6.0221415 \times 10^{23} molecules) of water at Note that the x-axis of the graph is called 'relative heat energy' because it takes a mole of water at 0 degrees Celsius as the reference point.
The sloped segments on the graph represent increases in temperature.
The flat segments represent phase transitions, governed by equation for latent heat.
Notice that the sloped segments have constant, though different, slopes.
According to this equation, the heat capacity at any particular phase would be the slope of the segment that corresponds to that phase on the graph.
The fact that the slopes are constant means that, within a particular phase, the heat capacity does not change significantly as a function of temperature.
Heat capacity is the amount of internal energy that the substance can store.
A large heat capacitance means the substance can store a lot of internal energy and thus the temperature changes slowly.
Aluminum foil has a small heat capacitance and water has a large one.
A 500 g piece of aluminum metal of unknown temperature is thrown into a cup containing 500 g of water which had an initial temperature of 20^\circ C .
