Define phase diagram.
Define the triple point.
Describe how to use the phase diagram to indicate the state of a material and different temperatures and pressures.
By compressing oxygen, oxygen can be turned into an easily stored liquid
How are rockets able to shoot up into the air?
Many rockets use a combination of kerosene and liquid oxygen for their fuel.
Oxygen can be reduced to the liquid state either by cooling or by using high pressure.
Since the oxygen is in a container essentially out in the open, maintaining a temperature of -183°C (the boiling point of oxygen) is not real practical.
But high pressure can be used to force the oxygen into tanks and cause it to liquefy so it can then mix with the kerosene and provide a powerful ignition to move the rocket.
The relationships among the solid, liquid, and vapor (gas) states of a substance can be shown as a function of temperature and pressure in single diagram.
A phase diagram is  graph showing the conditions of temperature and pressure under which a substance exists in the solid, liquid, and gas phases.
Examine the general phase diagram shown in the Figure below .
In each of the three colored regions of the diagram, the substance is in a single state (or phase).
The dark lines that act as the boundary between those regions represent the conditions under which the two phases are in equilibrium.
A phase diagram shows the state of a substance as a function of temperature and pressure
General phase diagram, which shows the state (phase) of a substance as a function of its temperature and pressure.
Find the  X on the pressure axis and presume that the value of  X is standard pressure of 1 atm.
As one moves left to right across the red line, the temperature of the solid substance is being increased while the temperature remains constant.
When point A is reached, the substance melts and the temperature  B on the horizontal axis represents the normal melting point of the substance.
Moving further to the right, the substance boils at point  Y and so point  C on the horizontal axis represents the normal boiling point of the substance.
