The frontal lobe of the cerebrum would process the information.
It might decide that the water is really cold and send a message to your muscles to pull your foot out of the water.
In some cases, messages about pain or temperature don’t travel all the way to and from the brain.
Instead, they travel only as far as the spinal cord, and the spinal cord responds to the messages by giving orders to the muscles.
This allows you to respond to pain more quickly.
When messages avoid the brain in this way, it forms a reflex arc , like the one shown below ( Figure below ).
In a reflex arc, an impulse travels to the spinal cord and directly back to cause a rapid reaction
Reflex Arc:
When a reflex hammer taps your knee, you may immediately kick your leg—without even thinking about it.
The nerve impulse from your knee travels to the spinal cord, and the spinal cord sends a message to your muscles to kick your leg.
Our sense of touch is controlled by a huge network of nerve endings and touch receptors.
This system is responsible for all the sensations we feel, including cold, hot, smooth, rough, pressure, tickle, itch, pain, vibrations, and more.
There are four main types of receptors: mechanoreceptors, thermoreceptors, pain receptors, and proprioceptors.
Mechanoreceptors perceive sensations such as pressure, vibrations, and texture.
Your brain gets an enormous amount of information about the texture of objects through your fingertips because the ridges that make up your fingerprints are full of these sensitive receptors.
Thermoreceptors perceive sensations related to the temperature of objects.
There are two basic categories of thermoreceptors: hot receptors and cold receptors.
The highest concentration of thermoreceptors can be found in the face and ears.
Pain receptors, or nociceptor detect pain or stimuli that can or does cause damage to the skin and other tissues of the body.
There are over three million pain receptors throughout the body, found in skin, muscles, bones, blood vessels, and some organs.
