Describe the function of the sodium-potassium pump.
What is this incredible object?
Would it surprise you to learn that it is a human cell?
The image represents an active human nerve cell.
How nerve cells function will be the focus of another concept.
However, active transport processes play a significant role in the function of these cells.
Specifically, it is the sodium-potassium pump that is active in the axons of these nerve cells.
The Sodium-Potassium Pump
Carrier proteins can work with a concentration gradient (passive transport), but some carrier proteins can move solutes against the concentration gradient (from low concentration to high concentration), with energy input from ATP.
As in other types of cellular activities, ATP supplies the energy for most active transport.
One way ATP powers active transport is by transferring a phosphate group directly to a carrier protein.
This may cause the carrier protein to change its conformation, which moves the molecule or ion to the other side of the membrane.
An example of this type of active transport system, as shown in Figure below , is the sodium-potassium pump, or Na + /K + -ATPase , a transmembrane ATPase, an integral membrane protein that exchanges sodium ions for potassium ions across the plasma membrane of animal cells.
The sodium-potassium pump is found in the plasma membrane of almost every human cell and is common to all cellular life.
It helps maintain resting potential , especially in neurons following a nerve impulse, and regulates cellular volume.
The sodium-potassium pump system moves sodium and potassium ions against large concentration gradients.
It moves two potassium ions into the cell where potassium levels are high, and pumps three sodium ions out of the cell and into the extracellular fluid.
As is shown in Figure above , the sodium-potassium pump transports Na + ions and K + ions in the following manner:
The sodium-potassium pump binds ATP and three intracellular Na + ions.
ATP is hydrolyzed resulting in adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and an inorganic phosphate.
