Could a clone , a genetically exact copy of an organism, be developed using techniques associated with biotechnology?
It could be argued that human cloning is one of the inevitable outcomes of modern biotechnology.
It "simply" involves the removal of the nucleus from a somatic cell and its placement into an unfertilized egg cell whose nucleus has either been deactivated or removed.
This new cell would mimic the zygote, the first diploid cell of a new organism.
This new zygote is allowed to become established, and a few days later is placed into the uterus of a surrogate mother.
Theoretically this would result in an individual genetically identical to the donor.
Obviously, there are many ethical and legal issues associated with human cloning, and of course, it is not a "simple" procedure.
But animal cloning is arguably a different story.
In February 1997, Ian Wilmut and his colleagues at the Roslin Institute announced the successful cloning of a sheep named Dolly from the mammary glands of an adult female ( Figure below ) ( Nature 385 , 810-13, 1997).
Dolly was the first mammal to be cloned from an adult somatic cell.
The cloning of Dolly made it apparent to many that the techniques used to produce her could someday be used to clone human beings.
This resulted in tremendous controversy because of its ethical implications.
After cloning was successfully demonstrated by Dolly's creators, many other large mammals, including horses and bulls, were cloned.
Dolly, however, was put down by lethal injection in February Prior to her death, Dolly had been suffering from lung cancer and crippling arthritis.
Although most sheep like Dolly live to be 11 to 12 years of age, postmortem examination of Dolly seemed to indicate that, other than her cancer and arthritis, she appeared to be quite normal.
Dolly was a mother to six lambs, bred through normal methods.
Cloning is now considered a promising tool for preserving endangered species.
Dolly the sheep.
Dolly was the first large mammal to be cloned.
In animal cloning, the nucleus from a somatic cell is inserted into an egg cell in which the nucleus has been removed.
