In contrast to facilitated diffusion which does not require energy and carries molecules or ions down a concentration gradient, active transport pumps molecules and ions against a concentration gradient.
Sometimes an organism needs to transport something against a concentration gradient, such as specific ions, or glucose and amino acids.
The only way this can be done is through active transport which uses transport proteins and energy that is produced by cellular respiration (ATP) or through an electrochemical gradient .
In active transport, the particles move across a cell membrane from a lower concentration to a higher concentration.
Active transport is the energy-requiring process of pumping molecules and ions across membranes "uphill" against a gradient.
The active transport of small molecules or ions across a cell membrane is generally carried out by transport proteins that are found in the membrane.
These transport proteins have receptor regions that bind to specific molecules and transport them into the cell.
Larger molecules such as starch can also be actively transported across the cell membrane by vesicular transport processes.
During active transport, specialized integral membrane proteins recognize the substance and allows it access.
Essentially this process is forcing a ion or molecule to cross the membrane when normally it would not.
Moving a substance against its concentration gradient is known as primary active transport , and the proteins involved in it as "pumps".
This process uses the energy of ATP.
In secondary active transport , energy from an electrochemical gradient is used to transport substances.
This process involves pore-forming proteins that form channels through the cell membrane.
Primary Active Transport
Primary active transport involves an integral membrane protein and the energy from ATP to transport molecules across a membrane.
This type of transport is mainly done by ATPases.
ATPases are a class of enzymes that catalyze the dephosphorylation of adenosine triphosphate into adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and a free phosphate ion.
This reaction releases energy, which is used to drive other chemical reactions that would not otherwise occur.
One ATPase necessary to all life is the sodium-potassium pump, which helps to maintain the cell potential.
