elemental analysis:
Determines the percentages of each element in a compound.
empirical formula:
Shows the lowest whole-number ratio of the elements in a compound.
Determining Molecular Formulas
Define molecular formula.
Determine the molecular formula when give the empirical formula and the molar mass of the compound.
Fischer projection of glucose
Structure of sucrose
How can you determine the differences between these two molecules?
Above we see two carbohydrates: glucose and sucrose.
Sucrose is almost exactly twice the size of glucose, although their empirical formulas are very similar.
Some people could distinguish them on the basis of taste, but it’s not a good idea to go around tasting chemicals.
The best way is to determine the molecular weights – this approach allows you to easily tell which compound is which.
Molecular formulas give the kind and number of atoms of each element present in a molecular compound.  In many cases, the molecular formula is the same as the empirical formula.  The molecular formula of methane is CH 4 and because it contains only one carbon atom, that is also its empirical formula.  Sometimes, however, the molecular formula is a simple whole-number multiple of the empirical formula.  Acetic acid  is an organic acid that is the main component of vinegar.  Its molecular formula is C 2 H 4 O 2 .  Glucose is  a simple sugar that cells use as a primary source of energy.  Its molecular formula is C 6 H 12 O 6 .  The structures of both molecules are shown in the figure below.  They are very different compounds, yet both have the same empirical formula of CH 2 O.
Acetic acid and glucose both the same empirical formula
Acetic acid (left) has a molecular formula of C 2 H 4 O 2 , while glucose (right) has a molecular formula of C 6 H 12 O 6 .
Both have the empirical formula CH 2 O.
Empirical formulas can be determined from the percent composition of a compound.  In order to determine its molecular formula, it is necessary to know the molar mass of the compound.  Chemists use an instrument called a mass spectrometer to determine the molar mass of compounds.  In order to go from the empirical formula to the molecular formula, follow these steps:
Calculate the empirical formula mass (EFM) , which is simply the molar mass represented by the empirical formula.
