The Sodium-Potassium Pump
Active transport is the energy-requiring process of pumping molecules and ions across membranes "uphill" - against a concentration gradient.
To move these molecules against their concentration gradient, a carrier protein is needed.
Carrier proteins can work with a concentration gradient (during passive transport), but some carrier proteins can move solutes against the concentration gradient (from low concentration to high concentration), with an input of energy.
In active transport, as carrier proteins are used to move materials against their concentration gradient, these proteins are known as pumps.
As in other types of cellular activities, ATP supplies the energy for most active transport.
One way ATP powers active transport is by transferring a phosphate group directly to a carrier protein.
This may cause the carrier protein to change its shape, which moves the molecule or ion to the other side of the membrane.
An example of this type of active transport system, as shown in Figure below , is the sodium-potassium pump, which exchanges sodium ions for potassium ions across the plasma membrane of animal cells.
How a sodium-potassium pump work
The sodium-potassium pump system moves sodium and potassium ions against large concentration gradients.
It moves two potassium ions into the cell where potassium levels are high, and pumps three sodium ions out of the cell and into the extracellular fluid.
As is shown in Figure above , three sodium ions bind with the protein pump inside the cell.
The carrier protein then gets energy from ATP and changes shape.
In doing so, it pumps the three sodium ions out of the cell.
At that point, two potassium ions from outside the cell bind to the protein pump.
The potassium ions are then transported into the cell, and the process repeats.
The sodium-potassium pump is found in the plasma membrane of almost every human cell and is common to all cellular life.
It helps maintain cell potential and regulates cellular volume.
A more detailed look at the sodium-potassium pump is available at (13:53) and
