Compound light microscopes use lenses to focus light.
Typical magnification of a light microscope is up to 1500x.
The various parts of the microscope are labeled.
This specifically is a phase contrast microscope.
Phase contrast microscopy is particularly important in biology, as it reveals many cellular structures that are not visible with a simpler bright field microscope.
This scientist is using a stereo microscope, which is a light microscope with two ocular lenses.
Resolution is a measure of the clarity of an image; it is the minimum distance two points can be separated and still be distinguished as two separate points.
Because light beams have a physical size, which is described in wavelengths, it is difficult to see an object that is about the same size or smaller than the wavelength of light.
Objects smaller than about 0.2 micrometers appear fuzzy, and objects below that size cannot be seen.
Magnification involves enlarging the image of an object so that it appears much bigger than its actual size.
Magnification also refers to the number of times an object is magnified.
For example, a lens that magnifies 100X, magnifies an object 100 times larger than its actual size.
Light microscopes have three objective lenses that have different magnifications, as shown in Figure below .
The ocular lens has a magnification of 10X, so a 100X objective lens and the ocular lens together will magnify an object by 1000X.
Objective lenses of a light microscope.
Objective lenses of a light microscope.
Visible light has wavelengths of 400 to 700 nanometers, which is larger than many objects of interest such as the insides of cells.
Scientists use different types of microscopes in order to get better resolution and magnification of objects that are smaller than the wavelength of visible light.
Objects that are to be viewed under an electron microscope may need to be specially prepared to make them suitable for magnification.
Electron microscopes use electrons instead of photons (light), because electrons have a much shorter wavelength than photons and thus allow a researcher to see things at much higher magnification, far higher than an optical microscope can possibly magnify.
