How Do Chloroplasts Convert Light Energy to Chemical Energy?
Excited electrons which have absorbed light energy are unstable.
However, the highly organized electron carrier molecules embedded in chloroplast membranes order the flow of these electrons, directing them through electron transport chains (ETCs).
At each transfer, small amounts of energy released by the electrons are captured and put to work or stored.
Some is also lost as heat with each transfer, but overall the light reactions are extremely efficient at capturing light energy and transforming it to chemical energy.
Two sequential transport chains harvest the energy of excited electrons, as shown in Figure below .
First, starting with photosystem II, electrons pass down an ETC which captures their energy and uses it to pump hydrogen ions by active transport into the thylakoids.
These concentrated ions store potential energy by forming a chemiosmotic gradient or electrochemical gradient – a higher concentration of both positive charge and hydrogen inside the thylakoid than outside.
The gradient formed by the H + ions is known as a chemiosmotic gradient.
Picture this energy buildup of H + as a dam holding back a waterfall.
Like water flowing through a hole in the dam, hydrogen ions “slide down” their concentration gradient through a membrane protein which acts as both ion channel and enzyme.
As they flow, the ion channel/enzyme ATP synthase uses their energy to chemically bond a phosphate group to ADP, making ATP.
Light re-energizes the electrons in photosystem I, and they travel down a second electron transport chain (ETC), eventually bonding hydrogen ions to NADP + to form a more stable energy storage molecule, NADPH.
NADPH is sometimes called “hot hydrogen,” and its energy and hydrogen atoms will be used to help build sugar in the second stage of photosynthesis.
Whereas photosystem II has an absorption maximum at 680nm, photosystem I has an absorption maximum at 700nm, and is known as P700.
Membrane architecture:
The large colored carrier molecules form electron transport chains that capture small amounts of energy from excited electrons in order to store it in ATP and NADPH.
Follow the energy pathways: light → electrons → NADPH (blue line) and light → electrons → concentrated H + → ATP (red line).
Note the intricate organization of the chloroplast.
NADPH and ATP molecules now store the energy from excited electrons – energy which was originally sunlight – in chemical bonds.
