In gases, both positive and negative ions can flow.
The difficulty of freeing protons, however, makes it extremely rare to have an electric current of positive particles in solid conductors.
Virtually all electric currents consist of the movement of electrons.
It is easy to assume that current is the flow of positive charges.
In fact, when the conventions of positive and negative charge were invented two centuries ago, it was assumed that positive charge flowed through a wire.
In reality, however, we know now that the flow of positive charge is actually a flow of negative charge in the opposite direction.
That is, when an electron moves from position A to position B, it is the same as a positive hole moving from B to A.
Today, even though we know it is not correct, we still use the historical convention of positive current flow when discussing the direction of a current.
Conventional current , the current we commonly use and discuss, is the direction positive current would flow.
When we want to speak of the direction of electron flow, we will specifically state that we are referring to electron flow.
Electric current flows from positions of higher potential energy to positions of lower potential energy.
Electrons acquire higher potential energy from an electron pump that does work on the electrons, moving them from positions of lower PE  to positions of higher PE .
Electrons in galvanic cells (several cells together comprise a battery) have higher potential energy at one terminal of the battery that at the other.
This difference in potential is related to chemical energy.
When the two terminals of the battery are connected to each other via a conducting wire, the electric current will travel from the terminal with higher potential energy to that with lower potential energy.
This setup is the most simple of electric circuits .
An electric circuit is any closed loop that goes from one battery terminal to the other and allows current to flow through it.
A relatively simple circuit is shown in the image below.
The charges move from the higher potential energy terminal on the battery, through the light bulb, through the switch, and back to the lower potential energy terminal on the battery.
Simple circuit with a switch, battery, and lightbulb
