Define ideal mechanical advantage.
Define actual mechanical advantage.
Calculate both ideal and actual mechanical advantages for simple machines.
Of the four variables, input force, output force, input distance, output distance, given three of them, calculate the fourth for simple machines.
An entertaining Rube Goldberg machine
A "Rube Goldberg Machine" is a complex construction of many simple machines connected end-to-end in order to accomplish a particular activity.  By design, Rube Goldberg Machines are far more intricate than necessary, and may be quite entertaining.
Although this kind of construction may be extremely inefficient, simple machines commonly make work easier, and can be found all around us.
A machine is an object or mechanical device that receives an input amount of work and transfers the energy to an output amount of work.
For an ideal machine , the input work and output work are always the same.
Remember that work is force times distance; even though the work input and output are equal, the input force does not necessarily equal the output force , nor does the input distance necessarily equal the output distance .
Machines can be incredibly complex (think of robots or automobiles), or very simple, such as a can opener.  A simple machine  is a mechanical device that changes the magnitude or direction of the force.
There are six simple machines that were first identified by Renaissance scientists: lever, pulley, inclined plane, screw, wedge, and wheel and axle.
These six simple machines can be combined together to form compound machines .
We use simple machines because they give us a mechanical advantage .
Mechanical advantage is a measurement of the force amplification of a machine.
In ideal machines, where there is no friction and the input work and output work are the same,
(\text{Effort Force})(\text{Effort Distance}) = (\text{Resistance Force})(\text{Resistance Distance})
The effort is the work that you do.
It is the amount of force you use times the distance over which you use it.
The resistance  is the work done on the object you are trying to move.
