The Krebs Cycle ( Figure above ) begins by combining each Acetyl-CoA with a four-carbon carrier molecule to make a 6-carbon molecule of citric acid (or citrate, its ionized form).
For this reason, the Krebs Cycle, named for a scientist who worked out its details, is also called the Citric Acid Cycle .
The cycle carries citric acid through a series of chemical reactions which gradually release energy and capture it in several carrier molecules.
For each Acetyl-CoA which enters the cycle, 3 NAD + are reduced to NADH, one molecule of FAD (another temporary energy carrier) is reduced to FADH 2 , and one molecule of ATP (actually a precursor, GTP, guanine triphosphate) is produced.
Study Figure above to locate each of these energy-capturing events.
Note what happens to carbon atoms (black dots in Figure above ).
For each 2-carbon Acetyl-CoA which enters the cycle, two molecules of carbon dioxide are released, completing the breakdown of the original 6-carbon glucose molecule.
The final step regenerates the original 4-carbon molecule which began the cycle, so that another Acetyl-CoA can enter the cycle.
In summary, the Krebs Cycle completes the breakdown of glucose which began with glycolysis.
Its chemical reactions oxidize all six of the original carbon atoms to CO 2 , and capture the energy released in 2 ATP, 6 NADH, and 2 FADH 2 .
These energy carriers join the 2 ATP and 2 NADH produced in glycolysis and the 2 NADH produced in the conversion of 2 pyruvates to 2 Acetyl-CoA molecules.
At the conclusion of the Krebs Cycle, glucose is completely broken down, yet only four ATP have been produced.
Moreover, although oxygen is required to drive the Krebs Cycle, the cycle’s chemical reactions do not themselves consume O 2 .
The conclusion of cellular respiration, stage 3, produces the majority of the ATP.
The Krebs cycle is reviewed at
Click on the image above for more content
Citric Acid Cycle :
Stage 2 of aerobic cellular respiration; a series of chemical reactions which completes the breakdown of glucose begun in stage 1, releasing more chemical energy and producing carbon dioxide; also called the Krebs cycle.
electron transport chain :
Series of electron-transport molecules that pass high-energy electrons from molecule to molecule and capture their energy.
