Light with a wavelength of 6.33 \times 10^{-7} \ m  is used in a double slit experiment.
The screen is placed 1.00 m from the slits and the first order line is found 65.5 mm from the central bright spot.
What is the separation between the slits?
diffraction:  Change in the directions and intensities of a group of waves after passing by an obstacle or through an aperture whose size is approximately the same as the wavelength of the waves.
monochromatic:  Light having only one wavelength.
constructive interference:  The interference of two or more waves of equal frequency and phase, resulting in their mutual reinforcement and producing a single amplitude equal to the sum of the amplitudes of the individual waves.
destructive interference:  The interference of two waves of equal frequency and opposite phase, resulting in their cancellation where the negative displacement of one always coincides with the positive displacement of the other.
Single Slit Interference
Explain how single slit diffraction patterns occur.
Use single slit diffraction patterns to calculate wavelength.
Light diffracting through a single slit
Though it looks like a double slit interference pattern, the pattern on the screen are actually the results of light diffracting through a single slit with the ensuing interference.
Single Slit Interference
Interference patterns are produced not only by double slits but also by single slits, otherwise known as single slit interference .
In the case of a single slit, the particles of medium at both corners of the slit act as point sources, producing circular waves from both edges.
These circular waves move across to the back wall and interfere in the same way that interference patterns were produced by double slits.
In the sketch at below, the black lines intersect at the center of the pattern on the back wall.
This center point is equidistanct from both edges of the slit.
Therefore, the waves striking at this position will be in phase; that is, the waves will produce constructive interference.
Also shown in the sketch, just above the central bright spot where the red lines intersect, is a position where destructive interference occurs.
