Shooting an arrow from a bow converts potential energy in the bent bow into the arrow's kinetic energy
Shooting an arrow from a bow requires work done on the bow by the shooter's arm to bend the bow and thus produce potential energy.
The release of the bow converts the potential energy of the bent bow into the kinetic energy of the flying arrow.
When an object is held above the earth, it has the ability to make matter move because all you have to do is let go of the object and it will fall of its own accord.
Since energy is defined as the ability to make matter move, this object has energy.
This type of energy is stored energy and is called potential energy.  An object held in a stretched rubber band also contains this stored energy.
Specifically, a rubber band (and the bow pictured above) has elastic potential energy.
If the stretched rubber band is released, the object will move.
If you hold two positive charges near each other, their electromagnetic  potential energy pushes them apart when you let go.
Potential energy is stored in chemical bonds ( chemical ).
When these bonds are broken, the excess energy is seen as molecular motion and heat.
If a cannon ball is fired straight up into the air, it begins with a high kinetic energy.
As the cannon ball rises, it slows down due to the force of gravity pulling it toward the earth.
As the ball rises, its gravitational potential energy is increasing and its kinetic energy is decreasing.
When the cannon ball reaches the top of its arc, its kinetic energy is zero and its potential energy is at the maximum.
As gravity continues to pull the cannon ball toward the earth, the ball will fall downwards, causing its height to decrease and its speed to increase.
The ball's potential energy decreases and its kinetic energy increases.
When the ball returns to its original height, its kinetic energy will be the same as when it started upward.
Shooting a cannonball directly upward demonstrates the relationship between kinetic and potential energy
When work is done on an object, the work may be converted into either kinetic or potential energy.
