The first involved the orbit of the planet Mercury.
The orbit of Mercury (the closest planet to the sun) exhibits perturbations and a precession that could not be fully explained by Newton’s Law of Universal Gravitation.
The motion of Mercury was in much greater agreement with the predictions from the equations of general relativity.
The acceptance of the theory of general relativity increased greatly after it was shown to correctly predict the orbit of Mercury.
Both Newton’s theory of universal gravity and the theory of general relativity predict that light can be deflected by gravity.
The calculation of the amount of deflection predicted by Einstein’s theory was approximately double that predicted by Newton’s theory.
The deflection of light by gravity was tested in 1919, five years after general relativity was proposed.
Two British groups took photographs of a region of the sky centered on the sun during the May 1919 total solar eclipse and compared the positions of the photographed stars with those of the same stars photographed from the same locations in July 1919 when the sun was far from that region of the sky.
Photons are bent by a star's gravitational field
The results showed that light was deflected when the sun was present, and also that this deflection was consistent with general relativity but not with “Newtonian physics”.
The subsequent publicity catapulted Einstein to world fame. (To date, he is the only scientist to ever have a ticker-tape parade in New York City.)
Other Predictions of the General Theory of Relativity
Einstein’s general theory of relativity states that time is a fourth dimension adding to the three dimensions of space.
Einstein called this four-dimensional geometry spacetime.
The general theory of relativity also predicted light coming from a strong gravitational field would have its wavelength shifted toward longer wavelengths, called a red-shift.
The theory also predicted that when gravity becomes great enough, it would produce objects called black holes.
Black holes are objects whose gravity is so massive that light cannot escape from the surface at all.
Since no light can escape, such objects would appear black.
Both gravitational red-shift and black holes were considered possible in the Newtonian theory, but measurements correspond better with Einstein's theory.
There are also interesting effects having to do with the “curved time” predicted by the theory of relativity.
