As this example shows, a frameshift mutation can dramatically change how the codons in mRNA are read.
This can have a drastic effect on the protein product.
For a cell or organism to maintain homeostasis, the proteins work in a highly defined and regulated manner.
It may take just one protein not working correctly to interrupt homeostasis.
A protein having more or less activity than normal, or a different activity or function, may be enough to interrupt homeostasis.
Mutations that may result in altered function of the gene product or protein are loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations, as well as dominant negative mutations.
Loss-of-function mutations result in a gene product or protein having less or no function.
These mutations are usually recessive as a dominant normal gene can overcome the effects of the mutation.
A null allele has a complete loss of function.
This will result in reduced dosage (amount) of a normal gene product in heterozygous individuals.
This reduced dosage may result in a normal phenotype.
Haploinsufficiency results in when a reduced dosage of a normal gene product does not produce a normal phenotype.
An example of a null allele is the O allele in the human A, B and O blood type system.
A and B refer to antigens on the surface of red blood cells.
The alleles for the A-antigen and B-antigen are co-dominant; if both are present, then both are expressed resulting in type AB blood.
The O blood type allele is a single base change mutated version of the A-antigen allele, resulting in no antigen expressed.
As no protein product is produced, the allele for the O blood type is a null allele.
Gain-of-function mutations result in the gene product or protein having a new and abnormal function and usually result in a dominant phenotype.
Examples of gain of function mutations occur in the thyroid hormone receptor gene.
The thyroid hormones, triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4), are necessary for maintaining an appropriate basal metabolic rate and affect essentially every tissue in the body.
