Carry out mathematical operations in scientific notation.
Identify the number of significant figures in given measurements.
Carry proper significant figures through math operations.
Computers like the CSIRAC were developed to aid scientists with complex mathematical operations
Scientists today use computers to aid with many complex mathematical operations used in science.
Computers take and store measurement readings and can save hours, days, or even years of mathematical calculations.
The image is of the CSIRAC (Council for Scientific and Industrial Research Automatic Computer), Australia's first digital computer, first run in November 1949.
A modern laptop has more computing power than this room-filling computer did.
Mathematics Tool Kit
What Is the Place of Mathematics in Physics?
There is certainly a lot of math in physics, but the concepts and theories of physics cannot be derived from only mathematics.
If you wish to build a complex mechanical structure, it is pointless to begin without wrenches and screwdrivers.
To build mechanical structures, you must have tools.
One of the primary tools for working in physics is mathematics.
This particular physics resource requires algebra, geometry, and trigonometry, but higher-level physics courses also require calculus.
In fact, calculus was invented by Isaac Newton specifically to solve physics problems; most advanced calculus problems are actually physics problems.
In the "Definition of Physics," it was noted that physics deals with objects as small as sub-atomic particles and as large as galaxies.
It should be clear that physicists deal with extremely small numbers - like the mass of a lead atom: 0.00000000000000000000034 g - and extremely large numbers - like the distance from our galaxy to the Andromeda galaxy: 2.5 million light years, which is approximately 25,000,000,000,000,000,000 km!
These numbers are difficult to write and even more difficult to calculate with.
It is much more convenient to write and calculate with such extreme numbers if they are written in scientific notation .
