The collision of the bat with the ball changes the direction and speed of the ball, with the idea of kinetic energy being involved again.
Kinetic Energy and Temperature
As stated in the kinetic-molecular theory, the temperature of a substance is related to the average kinetic energy of the particles of that substance.
When a substance is heated, some of the absorbed energy is stored within the particles, while some of the energy increases the motion of the particles.
This is registered as an increase in the temperature of the substance.
Average Kinetic Energy
At any given temperature, not all of the particles of a sample of matter have the same kinetic energy.
Instead, the particles display a wide range of kinetic energies.
Most of the particles have a kinetic energy near the middle of the range.
However, a small number of particles have kinetic energies a great deal lower or a great deal higher than the average (see Figure below ).
Graph of the distribution of molecular kinetic energies at high and low temperatures
A distribution of molecular kinetic energies as a function of temperature.
The blue curve is for a low temperature, while the red curve is for a high temperature.
The blue curve in the figure above is for a sample of matter at a relatively low temperature, while the red curve is for a sample at a relatively high temperature.
In both cases, most of the particles have intermediate kinetic energies, close to the average.
Notice that as temperature increases, the range of kinetic energies increases and the distribution curve “flattens out.” At a given temperature, the particles of any substance have the same average kinetic energy.
As a sample of matter is continually cooled, the average kinetic energy of its particles decreases.
Eventually, one would expect the particles to stop moving completely.
Absolute zero is the temperature at which the motion of particles theoretically ceases.
Absolute zero has never been attained in the laboratory, but temperatures on the order of 1 × 10 -10 K have been achieved.
