They are produced by the thyroid gland.
Production of these hormones is stimulated by thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), a glycoprotein secreted by the pituitary gland in the brain.
TSH binds with the TSH receptor on the surface of the cells of the thyroid gland, initiating a series of biochemical events that result in an increase in circulating thyroid hormones, which have numerous effects.
T3 and T4 levels are maintained by a negative feedback loop mechanism.
Mutations within the gene coding for the TSH receptor can result in problems for the body in controlling thyroid hormone levels.
Gain-of-functions mutations in the gene for the TSH receptor result in the receptor being constitutively active, or "switched on," even in the absence of TSH.
These mutations result in more thyroid hormone produced, resulting in the inability to maintain homeostasis and detrimental phenotypes.
A number of loss-of-function mutations have also been identified in the TSH receptor gene.
Dominant negative mutations have an altered gene product that acts in a dominant manner to the wild-type gene product in the same cell.
These two gene products often dimerize (combine) to make the protein.
Often the effects of such a mutation result in an inactive gene product.
Dominant negative mutations are often more harmful than null alleles.
Examples of dominant negative mutations occur with the collagen genes.
Type II collagen is the preeminent protein in cartilage.
The protein forms from three gene products of the gene for type II collagen, COL2A1 .
Mutations in the COL2A1 gene result in a phenotypic spectrum of disease, ranging from primatial lethal to comparatively moderate phenotypes.
The collagen protein is a trimer of three polypeptides.
A COL2A1 null allele will result in decreased amounts of normal collagen polypeptides produced.
Decreased amounts of the collagen protein result in a mild phenotype compared to phenotypes that result from a dominant negative mutation.
Half normal and half mutant polypeptides produced combine to form almost all abnormal collagen protein product.
