The cell adhesion proteins of the desmosome, desmoglein and desmocollin, are members of the cadherin family of adhesion proteins.
These proteins are transmembrane proteins that bridge the space between adjacent epithelial cells.
The extracellular domains of these cells bind to other cadherin proteins on an adjacent cell.
The extracellular domain of the desmosome is called the Extracellular Core Domain (ECD).
This is where the two adhesion proteins interact.
Tight junctions are the closely associated areas of two cells.
It is a type of junctional complex present only in vertebrates.
The corresponding junctions that occur in invertebrates are septate junctions.
An example of a tight junction is between epithelial cells in the distal convoluted tubule and the collecting duct part of the nephron in the kidney.
Tight junctions are common at epithelia, which are sheets of cells that form a boundary between a mass of cells and a cavity or space (a lumen ).
The membranes of these cells join together, forming a virtually impermeable barrier to fluid.
Tight junctions essentially seal adjacent epithelial cells in a narrow layer just beneath their apical surface, which is the portion of the cell exposed to the lumen.
The rest of the cell surface is known as the basolateral surface.
Tight junctions prevent integral membrane proteins from moving between the apical and basolateral surface, maintaining the properties of those distinct surfaces.
For example, receptor-mediated endocytosis occurs at the apical surface and exocytosis at the basolateral surface.
Tight junctions are composed of strands of transmembrane proteins embedded in the plasma membranes of two adjacent cells.
The extracellular domains of these proteins directly join to one another.
These joining proteins associate with peripheral membrane proteins located on the intracellular side of plasma membrane.
These peripheral proteins anchor the strands to the actin component of the cytoskeleton, effectively forming a molecular complex that joins together the cytoskeletons of adjacent cells.
The major types anchoring proteins of tight junctions are the claudins and the occludins.
