Einstein, at that time, believed in a static, eternal universe so he added a constant to his equations to eliminate the expansion.
Einstein would later call this the biggest blunder of his life.
In 1924, Edwin Hubble was able to measure the distance to observed celestial objects that were thought to be nebula and discovered that they were so far away they were not actually part of the Milky Way (the galaxy containing our sun).
He discovered that the Milky Way was only one of many galaxies.
In 1927, Georges Lemaitre, a physicist, suggested that the universe must be expanding.
Lemaitre’s theory was supported by Hubble in 1929 when he found that the galaxies most distant from us also had the greatest red shift (were moving away from us with the greatest speed).
The idea that the most distance galaxies were moving away from us at the greatest speed was exactly what was predicted by Lemaitre.
In 1931, Lemaitre went further with his predictions and by extrapolating backwards, found that the matter of the universe would reach an infinite density and temperature at a finite time in the past (around 15 billion years).
This meant that the universe must have begun as a small, extremely dense point of matter.
At the time, the only other theory that competed with Lemaitre’s theory was the “Steady State Theory” of Fred Hoyle.
The steady state theory predicted that new matter was created which made it appear that the universe was expanding but that the universe was constant.
It was Hoyle who coined the term “Big Bang Theory” which he used as a derisive name for Lemaitre’s theory.
George Gamow (1904 – 1968) was the major advocate of the Big Bang theory.
He predicted that cosmic microwave background radiation should exist throughout the universe as a remnant of the Big Bang.
As atoms formed from sub-atomic particles shortly after the Big Bang, electromagnetic radiation would be emitted and this radiation would still be observable today.
Gamow predicted that the expansion of the universe would cool the original radiation so that now the radiation would be in the microwave range.
The debate continued until 1965 when two Bell Telephone scientists stumbled upon the microwave radiation with their radio telescope.
Pythagoras was one of the first scientists to think that the earth was round.
Aristotle concluded that the earth does not move and the celestial objects rotate around the earth in circular orbits.
Ptolemy designed the “wheels within wheels” design of the cosmos to agree with Aristotle’s ideas and to provide an explanation of the retrograde motion of planets.
