You should keep in mind that no matter how complicated the probability pattern is, each shape represents a single orbital, and the entire probability pattern is the result of the various positions that either one or two electrons can take.
Energy comes in discrete packages called quanta.
Electrons in the electron cloud of atoms have a limited number of energy levels due to the quantization of energy.
The most common way to describe electrons in atoms according to quantum mechanics is to solve the Schrodinger equation for the energy states of the electrons within the electron cloud.
When the electron is in these states, its energy is well-defined but the electron position is not.
The position is described by a probability distribution map called an orbital.
Solutions to Schrödinger’s equation involve four special numbers called quantum numbers. (Three of the numbers, n , l , and m , come from Schrödinger’s equation, and the fourth one comes from an extension of the theory.)
These four numbers completely describe the energy of an electron.
Each electron has exactly four quantum numbers, and no two electrons have the same four numbers.
The principal quantum number, n , is a positive integer (1, 2, 3, \ldots n) that indicates the main energy level of an electron within an atom.
Follow up questions:
Who first suggested that matter also might exhibit the properties of both particles and waves?
When the concept of describing the trajectory of an electron was given up, what description of the electron replaced it?
If the shape of the electron orbital is spherical, how many values are possible for the quantum number l ?
If we were dealing with an atom that had a total of 20 electrons in its electron cloud, how many of those electrons would have quantum number n=1 .
What is the total number of electrons in the p -orbitals of the second energy level?
How many energy levels are necessary to contain the first 10 electrons in an electron cloud?
quantum:
A quantum is a discrete packet of energy.
photon:
