Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) was a very important person in the development of modern astronomy, both because of his contributions directly to astronomy, and because of his work in physics.
He provided the crucial observations that proved the Copernican hypothesis, and also laid the foundations for a correct understanding of how objects moved on the surface of the earth and of gravity.
One could, with considerable justification, view Galileo as the father both of modern astronomy and of modern physics.
Galileo did not invent the telescope, but he was the first to turn his telescope toward the sky to study the heavens systematically.
His telescope was poorer than even a cheap modern amateur telescope, but what he observed in the heavens showed errors in Aristotle’s opinion of the universe and the worldview that it supported.
Observations through Galileo’s telescope made it clear that the “earth-centered” and “earth doesn’t move” solar system of Aristotle was incorrect.
Since church officials had made some of Aristotle’s opinions a part of the religious views of the church, proving Aristotle’s views to be incorrect also pointed out flaws in the church.
Galileo observed four points of light that changed their positions around the planet Jupiter and he concluded that these were moons in orbit around Jupiter.
These observations showed that there were new things in the heavens that Aristotle and Ptolemy had known nothing about.
Furthermore, they demonstrated that a planet could have moons circling it that would not be left behind as the planet moved around its orbit.
One of the arguments against the Copernican system had been that if the moon were in orbit around the Earth and the Earth in orbit around the Sun, the Earth would leave the Moon behind as it moved around its orbit.
Galileo used his telescope to show that Venus, like the moon, went through a complete set of phases.
This observation was extremely important because it was the first observation that was consistent with the Copernican system but not the Ptolemaic system.
In the Ptolemaic system, Venus should always be in crescent phase as viewed from the Earth because the sun is beyond Venus, but in the Copernican system Venus should exhibit a complete set of phases over time as viewed from the Earth because it is illuminated from the center of its orbit.
It is important to note that this was the first empirical evidence (coming almost a century after Copernicus) that allowed a definitive test of the two models.
Until that point, both the Ptolemaic and Copernican models described the available data.
The primary attraction of the Copernican system was that it described the data in a simpler fashion, but here finally was conclusive evidence that not only was the Ptolemaic universe more complicated, it also was incorrect .
As each new observation was brought to light, increasing doubt was cast on the old views of the heavens.
It also raised the credibility issue: could the authority of Aristotle and Ptolemy be trusted concerning the nature of the Universe if there were so many things in the Universe about which they had been unaware and/or incorrect?
Galileo’s challenge of the Church’s authority through his refutation of the Aristotelian concept of the Universe eventually got him into deep trouble.
