One advantage is available to organisms occupying the few anoxic (lacking oxygen) niches remaining on earth.
Oxygen remains the highly reactive, toxic gas which caused the “Oxygen Catastrophe.” Aerobic organisms have evolved a few necessary materials, namely enzymes and antioxidants , to protect themselves.
Organisms living in anoxic niches do not run the risk of oxygen exposure, so they do not need to spend energy to build these elaborate chemicals.
Individual cells which experience anoxic conditions face greater challenges.
As demonstrated by lactic acid fermentation , muscle cells “still remember” anaerobic respiration, using this fermentation to make ATP in low-oxygen conditions, regenerating NAD + during this process.
However, other cells, like brain cells do not “remember” anaerobic respiration, and consequently cannot make any ATP without oxygen.
This explains why death follows for most humans who endure more than four minutes without oxygen.
Variation in muscle cells gives further insight into some benefits of anaerobic respiration.
In vertebrate muscles, lactic acid fermentation allows muscles to produce ATP quickly during short bursts of strenuous activity.
Muscle cells specialized for this type of activity show differences in structure as well as chemistry.
Red muscle fibers are “dark” because they have a rich blood supply for a steady supply of oxygen, and a protein, myoglobin, which holds extra oxygen.
They also contain more mitochondria, the organelle in which the Krebs cycle and electron transport chain conclude aerobic respiration.
This is endurance muscle.
White muscle cells are “light” because they lack the rich blood supply, have fewer mitochondria, and store the carbohydrate glycogen rather than oxygen.
This is muscle built for sprinting.
Each type of muscle fiber has advantages and disadvantages, which reflect their differing biochemical pathways.
Aerobic respiration in red muscles full of mitochondria, produces a great deal of ATP from far less glucose - but slowly, over a long time.
Anaerobic respiration in white muscle cells full of carbohydrates, produces ATP rapidly for quick bursts of speed, but a predator who continues pursuit may eventually catch a white-muscled prey.
In summary, aerobic and anaerobic respiration each have advantages under specific conditions.
Aerobic respiration produces far more ATP, but risks exposure to oxygen toxicity.
