Cell Structures - Advanced
Describe the cellular structure-function relationship.
What are cell structures?
The contents of the cell, or the structures of the cell, allow the cell to be "specialized." Together with the cell's proteins, they allow the cell to do specific things.
They allow a cell to act like a neuron or a bone cell or a skin cell.
Introduction to Cellular Structures
The invention of the microscope opened up a previously unknown world.
Before the invention of the microscope, very little was known about what made up living things and non-living things, or where living things came from.
During the discovery of cells, spontaneous generation — the belief that living organisms grow directly from decaying organic substances — was the accepted explanation for the appearance of small organisms.
For example, people accepted that mice spontaneously appeared in stored grain, and maggots formed in meat with no apparent external influence.
Once cells were discovered, the search for answers to such questions as "What are cells made of?" and "What is the function of cells?" became the focus of study.
The structure and contents of a typical animal cell.
Every animal cell has a cell membrane, cytoplasm, ribosomes, and a nucleus, but not all cells have every structure shown here.
For example, some cells such as red blood cells do not have any mitochondria, yet others such as muscle cells may have thousands of mitochondria.
Cells share the same needs: the need to get energy from their environment, the need to respond to their environment, and the need to reproduce.
Cells must also be able to separate their relatively stable interior from the ever-changing external environment.
They do this by coordinating many processes that are carried out within organelles, or other cellular structures.
Structures that are common to many different cells indicate the common history shared by cell-based life.
Examples of these common structures include the components of both the cell (or plasma) membrane and the cytoskeleton, and other structures shown in Figure above .
Is there a relationship between the cell structure and its function?
