It starts with the ligand binding its receptor.
Once the signal is internalized, the second messenger then begins a cascade of reactions that can greatly change the behavior of the cell.
A signal-transduction pathway is the signaling mechanism by which a cell changes a signal on its surface into a specific response inside the cell.
This process begins when a ligand binds to its receptor.
The receptor may either be a cell-surface receptor in the cell membrane or a nuclear receptor in the cytoplasm of the cell.
See DNA responds to signals from outside the cell at to see James Darnall speak about signal transduction.
Signal transduction most often involves an ordered sequence of chemical reactions inside the cell which is carried out by enzymes and other molecules.
In many signal transduction processes, the number of proteins and other molecules participating in these events increases as the process progresses from the binding of the signal.
A "signal cascade" begins.
Think of a signal cascade as a chemical domino-effect inside the cell, in which one domino knocks over two dominoes, which in turn knock over four dominoes, and so on.
The advantage of this type of signaling to the cell is that the message from one little signal molecule can be greatly amplified and have a dramatic effect.
How a G-protein linked receptor works with the help of a G-protein.
G proteins (guanine nucleotide-binding proteins) are a family of GTPases involved in transmitting chemical signals outside the cell, and causing changes inside the cell.
When a ligand binds to a G protein coupled receptor, an intracellular domain of the receptor activates a G protein.
The G protein then activates additional intracellular pathways, resulting in an altered intracellular environment.
G proteins function as molecular switches.
When they bind guanosine triphosphate (GTP), they are 'on', and, when they bind guanosine diphosphate (GDP), they are 'off'.
G Protein Coupled Receptors and Cyclic AMP
G protein linked receptors are only found in higher eukaryotes, including yeast, plants, and animals.
Your senses of sight and smell are dependent on G-protein linked receptors.
