They can cause cancer by turning the receptor permanently on (constitutively), even without signals from outside the cell.
Cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases
Src-family, Syk-ZAP-70 family, and BTK family of tyrosine kinases, the Abl gene in CML - Philadelphia chromosome
Cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases are similar to receptor tyrosine kinases, except that they are located within the cell.
They in turn phosphorylate tyrosine residues of target proteins, initiating a cascade of intracellular processes.
Cytoplasmic serine/threonine kinases and their regulatory subunits
Raf kinase, and cyclin-dependent kinases.
Cytoplasmic serine/threonine kinases are similar to cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases, except that serene or throne residues are phosphorylated.
Ras is a small GTPase that hydrolyses GTP into GDP and phosphate.
Ras is activated by growth factor signaling, and activates or inactivates growth signaling pathways.
Downstream effectors of Ras include Raf, MEK, MEKK, MAPK, ERK, most of which in turn regulate genes that mediate cell proliferation.
myc gene products regulate transcription of genes that induce cell proliferation. c-fos gene products interacts with c-jun and forms the AP-1 early response transcription factor.
Several Mutations to Cause Cancer
Typically, a series of several mutations that constitutively activate oncogenes and inactivate tumor suppressor genes is required to transform a normal cell into a cancer cell ( Figure below ).
Cells have developed a number of control mechanisms to overcome mutations in proto-oncogenes.
Therefore, a cell needs multiple mutations to transform into a cancerous cell.
A mutation in one proto-oncogene would not cause cancer, as the effects of the mutation would be masked by the normal control of the cell cycle and the actions of tumor suppressor genes.
Similarly, a mutation in one tumor suppressor gene would not cause cancer either, due to the presence of many "backup" genes that duplicate its functions.
It is only when enough proto-oncogenes have mutated into oncogenes and enough tumor suppressor genes have been deactivated that the cancerous transformation can begin.
Signals for cell growth overwhelm the signals for growth regulation, and the cell quickly spirals out of control.
