Facilitated diffusion is a type of passive transport.
Even though facilitated diffusion involves transport proteins, it is still passive transport because the solute is moving down the concentration gradient.
Small nonpolar molecules can easily diffuse across the cell membrane.
However, due to the hydrophobic nature of the lipids that make up cell membranes, polar molecules (such as water) and ions cannot do so.
Instead, they diffuse across the membrane through transport proteins.
A transport protein completely spans the membrane, and allows certain molecules or ions to diffuse across the membrane.
Channel proteins, gated channel proteins, and carrier proteins are three types of transport proteins that are involved in facilitated diffusion.
A channel protein , a type of transport protein, acts like a pore in the membrane that lets water molecules or small ions through quickly.
Water channel proteins (aquaporins) allow water to diffuse across the membrane at a very fast rate.
Ion channel proteins allow ions to diffuse across the membrane.
A gated channel protein is a transport protein that opens a "gate," allowing a molecule to pass through the membrane.
Gated channels have a binding site that is specific for a given molecule or ion.
A stimulus causes the "gate" to open or shut.
The stimulus may be chemical or electrical signals, temperature, or mechanical force, depending on the type of gated channel.
For example, the sodium gated channels of a nerve cell are stimulated by a chemical signal which causes them to open and allow sodium ions into the cell.
Glucose molecules are too big to diffuse through the plasma membrane easily, so they are moved across the membrane through gated channels.
In this way glucose diffuses very quickly across a cell membrane, which is important because many cells depend on glucose for energy.
A carrier protein is a transport protein that is specific for an ion, molecule, or group of substances.
Carrier proteins "carry" the ion or molecule across the membrane by changing shape after the binding of the ion or molecule.
Carrier proteins are involved in passive and active transport.
