You will learn more about cells and the Cell Theory in Cells:
The Cell Theory (Advanced) concept.
Tiny diatoms and whale sharks are all made of cells.
Diatoms are about 20 µm in diameter and are made up of one cell, whereas whale sharks can measure up to 12 meters in length, and are made up of billions of cells.
An organism's traits are encoded in their DNA , the large molecule, or macromolecule, that holds the instructions needed to build cells and organisms.
DNA makes up the genes of an organism.
Traits are passed on from one generation to the next by way of these genes.
Information for how the organism appears and how its cells work come from the organism’s genes.
Although the appearance and cell function of the organism may change due to the organism’s environment, the environment does not change its genes.
The only way that genes can change in response to a particular environment is through the process of evolution in populations of organisms.
You will learn more about DNA and genes in Concept Molecular Biology (Advanced) .
Homeostasis is the ability of an organism to control its body functions in order to uphold a stable internal environment even when its external environment changes.
All living organisms perform homeostasis.
For example, cells maintain a stable internal acidity (pH); and warm-blooded animals maintain a constant body temperature.
You will learn more about homeostasis in the The Human Body:
Homeostasis (Advanced) concept.
Homeostasis is a term that is also used when talking about the environment.
For example, the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide on Earth has been regulated by the concentration of plant life on Earth, because plants remove more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere during the daylight hours than they emit to the atmosphere at night.
Evolution by natural selection , is the theory that maintains that a population's inherited traits change over time, and that all known organisms have a common origin.
This theory, initially described by Charles Darwin, describes why organisms must adapt to their environments.
