Scientists are part of a community that is based on ideals of trust and freedom, and their work can have a direct effect on society.
As a result, the public usually has an interest in the results of research that will directly affect them.
Therefore it is important that you can understand the meaning of a story about science when you read it, see it, or hear about it and become an engaged and active member of the public when making decisions involving science.
Science As a Human Endeavor
Conducting science requires part human creativity and part scientific skepticism.
Researchers make new observations and develop new ideas with the aim of describing the world more accurately or completely.
These observations and ideas are often based on existing theories and observations that were made by earlier scientists.
The history of molecular biology , for example, is the study of molecules that make up living things, and is a good example of how scientific knowledge builds on earlier knowledge.
Researchers from chemistry and physics were involved in the early investigations to discover what was responsible for heredity.
Scientists in the late 19 th and early 20 th century knew that organisms inherited certain characteristics such as hair color from their parents.
What we now call "genes" were then called “units of heredity.” However at the time, scientists did not know exactly how these heredity units were inherited or what they were made of.
Following the development of the Mendelian theory of heredity in the 1910s and the development of atomic theory and quantum mechanics in the 1920s, such explanations began to seem within reach.
Researchers from chemistry and physics turned their attention to this biological question.
Still, in the 1930s and 1940s it was not clear which, if any, area of research would be most successful.
In 1940, geneticists George Beadle and Edward Tatum demonstrated a relationship between genes and proteins.
In 1944, physician and researcher Oswald Avery further elaborated on that finding by demonstrating that genes are made up of DNA.
In 1952, geneticist Alfred Hershey and lab assistant Martha Chase confirmed that the genetic material of a virus that infects bacteria is made up of DNA.
And in 1953, biologist James Watson and biophysicist Francis Crick, with the help of X-ray crystallographer Rosalind Franklin, worked out the three dimensional structure of DNA and built a model of the double helix structure of the molecule.
There have been many additional discoveries about DNA and heredity since then, which will be discussed in additional concepts.
Influences on Scientific Research
