The electrons may either remain free or may attach to another object.
In that case, the extra electrons cause that object to become negatively charged.
Atoms that have lost electrons and become positively charged are called positive ions, and atoms that have gained electrons and become negatively charged are called negative ions .
Electrons can be removed from some objects using friction, simply by rubbing one substance against another substance.
There are many examples of objects becoming charged by friction, including a rubber comb through hair, and a balloon on a sweater.
In both these instances, the electrons move from the second object to the first, causing the first object to become negatively charged and the second one positively charged.
Friction between the tires on a moving car and the road cause the tires to become charged, and wind causes friction between clouds and air which causes clouds to become charged and can result in tremendous bolts of lightning.
Illustration of charged sweater and balloon
A common method of producing charge in the lab is to rub cat or rabbit fur against stiff rubber, producing a negative charge on the rubber rod.
If you hold a rubber rod on one end and rub only the tip of the other end with a fur, you will find that only the tip becomes charged.
The electrons you add to the tip of the rod remain where you put them instead of moving around on the rod.
Rubber is an insulator.
Insulators are substances that do not allow electrons to move through them.
Glass, dry wood, most plastics, cloth, and dry air are common insulators.
Materials that allow electrons to flow freely are called conductors.  Metals have at least one electron that can move around freely, and all metals are conductors.
Forces are exerted on charged objects by other charged objects.
You've probably heard the saying "opposites attract," which is true in regards to charged particles.
Opposite charges attract each other, while like charges repulse each other.
This can be seen in the image below.
When two negatively charged objects are brought near each other, a repulsive force is produced.
