Clinical trials have shown that people who have blood pressures at the low end of these ranges have much better long term cardiovascular health.
Blood pressure is measured with a sphygmomanometer ( Figure below ).
A sphygmomanometer is an inflatable cuff and pressure meter used to measure blood pressure
A digital sphygmomanometer is made of an inflatable cuff and a pressure meter to measure blood pressure.
This reading shows a blood pressure of 126/70.
Hypertension , which is also called "high blood pressure," occurs when a person’s blood pressure is always high.
Hypertension is said to be present when a person's systolic blood pressure is always 140 or higher, and/or if the person's diastolic blood pressure is always 90 or higher.
Having hypertension increases a person’s chance for developing heart disease, having a stroke, or suffering from other serious cardiovascular diseases.
Hypertension often does not have any symptoms, so a person may not know that he or she has high blood pressure.
For this reason, hypertension is often called the "silent killer." Treatments for hypertension include diet changes, exercise, and medication.
Foods thought to lower blood pressure include skim milk, spinach, beans, bananas and dark chocolate.
Some health conditions, as well as a person's lifestyle and genetic background, can put someone at a higher risk for developing high blood pressure.
As a person cannot alter their genetic background, lifestyle changes may be necessary to reduce the chance of developing high blood pressure.
These changes include getting enough exercise, limiting the amount of sodium (salt) in the diet, not being overweight, not drinking alcohol to excess, and not smoking.
Low blood pressure is not usually a concern, as long as there are no problems associated with the low pressure.
Symptoms associated with low blood pressure include dizziness or lightheadedness, fainting, dehydration and unusual thirst, lack of concentration, blurred vision, nausea, and fatigue.
Blood pressure occurs when circulating blood puts pressure on the walls of blood vessels.
Hypertension, or high blood pressure, can increase the risk of cardiovascular disease.
Use the resource below to answer the questions that follow.
Blood Pressure at
