An epidemic is an outbreak of a disease within a population of people during a specific time.
Every year in the United States, about 200,000 people are hospitalized and 36,000 people die from the flu.
Flu pandemics can kill millions of people.
A pandemic is an epidemic that spreads through human populations across a large region (for example a continent), or even worldwide.
Three influenza pandemics occurred in the 20th century and killed tens of millions of people, with each of these pandemics being caused by the appearance of a new strain of the virus.
Most influenza strains can be inactivated easily by disinfectants and detergents.
Emerging Viral Diseases
Modern modes of transportation allow more people and products to travel around the world at a faster pace.
They also open the airways to the transcontinental movement of infectious disease vectors.
One example of this occurring is West Nile Virus , which scientists believe was introduced to the United States by an infected air traveler.
With the use of air travel, people are able to go to foreign lands, contract a disease and not have any symptoms of illness until they get home, possibly exposing others to the disease along the way.
See Virus Crisis at  for additional information.
Often, new diseases result from the spread of an existing disease from animals to humans.
A disease that can be spread from animals to humans is called a zoonosis .
When a disease breaks out, scientists called epidemiologists investigate the outbreak, looking for its cause.
Epidemiologists are like detectives trying to solve a crime.
The information epidemiologists learn is important to understand the pathogen, and help prevent future outbreaks of disease.
A deadly strain of avian flu virus named H5N1 has posed the greatest risk for a new influenza pandemic since it first killed humans in Asia in the 1990s.
The virus is passed from infected birds to humans.
Fortunately, the virus has not mutated to a form that spreads easily between people.
