G-protein linked receptors are also involved in the phosphatidylinositol (PI) signal pathway.
In this pathway, PI can be phosphorylated to form phosphatidylinositol phosphate (PIP), phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP 2 ) and phosphatidylinositol trisphosphate (PIP 3 ), which are collectively called phosphoinositides.
These molecules play important roles in lipid signaling, cell signaling and membrane trafficking.
In response to a signal, a cell may change activities in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus that include the switching on or off of genes.
Changes in metabolism, continued growth, movement, or death are some of the cellular responses to signals that require signal transduction.
Gene activation leads to other effects, since the protein products of many of the responding genes include enzymes and factors that increase gene expression.
Gene expression factors produced as a result of a cascade can turn on even more genes.
Therefore one stimulus can trigger the expression of many genes, and this in turn can lead to the activation of many complex events.
In a multicellular organism these events include the increased uptake of glucose from the blood stream (stimulated by insulin), and the movement of neutrophils to sites of infection (stimulated by bacterial products).
The set of genes and the order in which they are activated in response to stimuli are often called a genetic program.
Signal transduction pathways.
Ras (upper middle section) activates a number of pathways but an especially important one seems to be the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK).
MAPK transmit signals downstream to other protein kinases and gene regulatory proteins.
Note that many of these pathways are initiated when a signal binds to its receptor outside the cell.
Most pathways end with altered gene regulation and cell proliferation.
The p53 tumor suppressor protein is shown at the lower section of the figure stimulating p21.
The complexity of the pathways demonstrate the significant role these play in the cell.
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP, cyclic AMP) :
A second messenger important in many biological processes; used for intracellular signal transduction, such as transferring into cells the effects of hormones.
G protein (guanine nucleotide-binding protein) :
