Microphotograph of the root tip of a broad bean show rapidly dividing apical meristem tissue just behind the root cap.
Numerous cells in various stages of mitosis can be observed.
Apical meristems differentiate into the three basic types of meristem tissue which correspond to the three types of tissue: protoderm produces new epidermis, ground meristem produces ground tissue, and procambium produces new xylem and phloem.
These three types of meristem are considered primary meristem because they allow growth in length or height, which is known as primary growth.
Secondary meristems allow growth in diameter (secondary growth) in woody plants.
Herbaceous plants do not have secondary growth.
The two types of secondary meristem are both named cambium , meaning “exchange” or “change”.
Vascular cambium produces secondary xylem (toward the center of the stem or root) and phloem (toward the outside of the stem or root), adding growth to the diameter of the plant.
This process produces wood, and builds the sturdy trunks of trees.
Cork cambium lies between the epidermis and the phloem, and replaces the epidermis of roots and stems with bark, one layer of which is cork.
Ways that plants can grow
Woody plants grow in two ways.
Primary growth adds length or height, mediated by apical meristem tissue at the tips of roots and shoots – which is difficult to show clearly in cross-sectional diagrams.
Secondary growth adds to the diameter of a stem or root; vascular cambium adds xylem (inward) and phloem (outward), and cork cambium replaces epidermis with bark.
See  for a time-lapse video of plant growth.
Most plants continue to grow as long as they live.
They grow through a combination of cell growth and cell division (mitosis).
The key to plant growth is meristem, a type of plant tissue consisting of undifferentiated cells that can continue to divide and differentiate.
Meristem allows plant stems and roots to grow longer (primary growth) and wider (secondary growth).
Use this resource to answer the questions that follow.
