Why the difference?
The actual space occupied by the earth is three dimensional and spherical.
When that space is altered in order to fit it onto a two-dimensional sheet of paper, the actual geometry of the surface is altered.
A straight line on a curved surface does not mean the same thing as a straight line on a flat surface.
When an object travels through curved space, it must follow the curvature of the space in order to move in a straight line.
When there is no mass in a volume of space, the space is not curved.
An object passing through such space would follow a straight line in our normal way of thinking of a straight line.
Straight line in flat space
Straight line in curved space
When a large mass is placed in the space, however, the space is curved due to the presence of the mass.
In this case, an object passing through the space must follow the curvature of the space in order to follow a straight line.
Thus the path of the object bends toward the mass.
The change in the direction the object appears to be exactly the same as it would have been following Newton’s law of gravity.
In the general theory of relativity, objects move toward each other not because of a force that acts at a distance but because they are following curved space.
The mathematical expressions describing the properties of a gravitational field around a mass are given in a set of formulas called the Einstein Field Equations .
These formulas are a highly complex system of partial differential equations, which are beyond the scope of our material.
Under normal levels of gravitational field strength, however, the relativistic mathematics for gravity reduce to Newton’s mathematics for gravity.
When gravitational field strength is extremely high, however, the correct movement of objects can only be calculated with Einstein’s relativistic gravity.
Mass tells space how to curve and space tells mass how to move.
Experimental tests to garner support for the general theory of relativity were not easy to find.
