These electrons, also referred to as delocalized electrons, do not belong to any one atom, but are capable of moving through the entire crystal.
As a result, metals are good conductors of electricity.
As seen in the Table above , the melting points of metallic crystals display a wide range.
Metallic crystals are good conductors of electricity
Metallic crystal lattice with free electrons able to move among positive metal atoms.
Covalent network crystals -- A covalent network crystal consists of atoms at the lattice points of the crystal, with each atom being covalently bonded to its nearest neighbor atoms (see Figure below ).
The covalently bonded network is three-dimensional and contains a very large number of atoms.
Network solids include diamond, quartz, many metalloids, and oxides of transition metals and metalloids.
Network solids are hard and brittle, with extremely high melting and boiling points.
Being composed of atoms rather than ions, they do not conduct electricity in any state.
Covalent crystals, such as diamond, are nonconductive and brittle
Diamond is a network solid and consists of carbon atoms covalently bonded to one another in a repeating three-dimensional pattern.
Each carbon atom makes four single covalent bonds in a tetrahedral geometry.
Molecular crystals -- Molecular crystals typically consist of molecules at the lattice points of the crystal, held together by relatively weak intermolecular forces (see Figure below ).
The intermolecular forces may be dispersion forces in the case of nonpolar crystals, or dipole-dipole forces in the case of polar crystals.
Some molecular crystals, such as ice, have molecules held together by hydrogen bonds.
When one of the noble gases is cooled and solidified, the lattice points are individual atoms rather than molecules.
In all cases, the intermolecular forces holding the particles together are far weaker than either ionic or covalent bonds.
As a result, the melting and boiling points of molecular crystals are much lower.
Lacking ions or free electrons, molecular crystals are poor electrical conductors.
