Countries with long histories of royalty take the naming even further.
One line of kings named Henry goes up to Henry the Eighth (not the nicest guy in the world – he had six wives and two of them came to untimely ends).
The use of numbering for names adds clarity to a system –we always know which Henry we are talking about.
Inorganic chemical compounds can be broadly classified into two groups: ionic compounds and molecular compounds.  The structure of all ionic compounds is an extended three-dimensional array of alternating positive and negative ions.  Since ionic compounds do not take the form of individual molecules, they are represented by empirical formulas.  Now we will begin to examine the formulas and nomenclature of molecular compounds.
Molecular compounds are inorganic compounds that take the form of discrete molecules .  Examples include such familiar substance as water (H 2 O) and carbon dioxide (CO 2 ).  These compounds are very different from ionic compounds like sodium chloride (NaCl).  Ionic compounds are formed when metal atoms lose one or more of their electrons to nonmetal atoms.  The resulting cations and anions are electrostatically attracted to each other.
So what holds the atoms of a molecule together?  Rather than forming ions, the atoms of a molecule share their valence electrons in such a way that a bond forms between pairs of atoms.  In a carbon dioxide molecule, there are two of these bonds, each occurring between the carbon atom and one of the two oxygen atoms.
Structure of a carbon dioxide molecule
Carbon dioxide molecules consist of a central carbon atom bonded to 2 oxygen atoms.
Larger molecules can have many, many bonds that serve to keep the molecule together.  In a large sample of a given molecular compound, all of the individual molecules are identical.
Naming Binary Molecular Compounds
Recall that a molecular formula shows the number of atoms of each element that a molecule contains.  A molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom, so its formula is H 2 O.  A molecule of octane, which is a component of gasoline, contains 8 atoms of carbon and 18 atoms of hydrogen.  The molecular formula of octane is C 8 H 18 .
Bottle of nitrogen dioxide
Nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ) is a reddish-brown toxic gas that is a prominent air pollutant produced by internal combustion engines.
A binary molecular compound is a molecular compound that is composed of two elements.  The elements that combine to form binary molecular compounds are both nonmetal atoms.  This contrasts with ionic compounds, which were formed from a metal ion and a nonmetal ion.
Therefore, binary molecular compounds are different because ionic charges cannot be used to name them or to write their formulas.
Another difference is that two nonmetal atoms will frequently combine with one another in a variety of ratios.  Consider the elements nitrogen and oxygen.  They combine to make several compounds including NO, NO 2 , and N 2 O.
They all can’t be called nitrogen oxide.
How would someone know which one you were talking about?
Each of the three compounds has very different properties and reactivity.
A system to distinguish between compounds such as these is necessary.
