For example, two researchers, Evangelos Michelakis and Steven Archer of the University of Alberta, Canada, recently reported that a drug that has been used for in the treatment of rare metabolic disorders could be an effective drug for the treatment of several forms of cancer.
Dichloroacetic acid, (DCA), is a chemical compound that appears to change the way cancer cells get energy, without affecting the function of normal cells.
The researchers found that DCA killed cancer cells that were grown in the lab and reduced the size of tumors in rats.
However, DCA is non-patentable as a compound.
A patent is a set of rights granted to a person or company (the patentee) for a certain period of time which allows the patentee the exclusive right to make, use, sell, or offer to sell the patented item.
Because DCA cannot currently be patented, concerns are raised that without the financial security a patent would ensure, the financial incentive for the pharmaceutical industry to get involved in DCA-cancer research would be reduced, and therefore clinical trials of DCA may not be funded.
But, other sources of funding exist-- previous studies of DCA have been funded by government organizations such as the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and by private charities such as the Muscular Dystrophy Association.
Recognizing the possible challenges to funding, Dr.
Michelakis's lab took the unusual step of directly asking for online donations to fund the research.
After six months, his lab had raised over $800,000, which was enough to fund a small clinical study.
Dr.
Michelakis and Dr.
Archer have since applied for a patent on the use of DCA in the treatment of cancer.
Funding for research can also be influenced by the public and by social issues.
An intense amount of public interest was raised by the DCA study.
The story received much media attention in early 2007.
As a result, the American Cancer Society and other medical organizations received a large volume of public interest and questions regarding DCA.
A few months later, the Department of Medicine of Alberta University reported that after the trial funding was secured, both the Alberta local ethics committee and Health Canada approved the first DCA Clinical Trial in Cancer.
Government funding of research can be indirectly influenced by the public.
Funding priorities for specific research can be influenced by the ethical beliefs or reservations of elected public officials, or influenced by the public during constitutional amendment elections.
