Old World generally refers to monkeys of Africa and Asia.
New World refers to monkeys of the Americas.
New World species, including tamarins (squirrel-sized monkeys) and marmosets (very small primitive monkeys) ( Figure below ), form pair bonds , which is a partnership between a mating pair that lasts at least one season.
The pair cooperatively raise the young and generally do not show a significant size difference between the sexes.
Old World monkeys do not tend to form monogamous relationships.
A macaque is an Old World monkey, while a tamarin and marmoset are new world monkeys
( left ) An Old World monkey, a species of macaque, in Japan. ( center ) A New World species of monkey, a tamarin. ( right ) Another New World species of monkey, the pygmy marmoset.
Where Do Non-human Primates Live?
Non-human primates live mostly in Central and South America, Africa, and South Asia.
Since primates evolved from animals living in trees, many modern species still live mostly in trees.
Other species live on land most of the time, such as baboons ( Figure below ) and the Patas monkey.
Only a few species live on land all of the time, such as the gelada and humans.
Baboons are partially terrestrial
Baboons are partially terrestrial.
Pictured here is a mother baboon and her young.
Primates live in a diverse number of forested habitats, including rain forests, mangrove forests and mountain forests to altitudes of over 9,800 feet.
The combination of opposable thumbs, short fingernails, and long, inward-closing fingers has allowed some species to develop the ability to move by swinging their arms from one branch to another ( Figure below ).
Another feature for climbing are expanded finger-like parts, such as those in tarsiers, which improve grasping ( Figure below ).
A few species, such as the proboscis monkey, De Brazza’s monkey, and Allen’s swamp monkey, evolved webbed fingers so they can swim and live in swamps and aquatic habitats.
Some species, such as the rhesus macaque and the Hanuman langur, can even live in cities by eating human garbage.
