These electrons are loosely attached to the atom and can easily be removed, leaving more protons in the atom that there are electrons, so the resulting ion has a positive charge.
Cations can also be formed from electron loss to many of the transition elements.
The periodic table
Periodic table of elements, notated with group numbers.
The cations are designated by the symbol for the parent element and a plus charge as a superscript after the element symbol - the potassium cation would be indicated as K + .  Note that the charge is placed after the symbol and not before it.  The potassium ion is monovalent , meaning that it has lost one electron and has a +1 charge.  The symbol for the magnesium cation would be Mg 2+ or Mg ++ to indicate that it has lost two electrons and has a +2 charge, so the magnesium cation would be referred to as a divalent cation.
The cations are simply named as the parent element.
The sodium cation is still called “sodium.” Often, the charge would be attached for clarity, so the sodium cation might be referred to as “sodium one plus.”
Applications of Cations
Cations play important roles in our daily lives.  Sodium, potassium, and magnesium ions are essential for such processes as blood pressure regulation and muscle contraction.
Calcium ion is an important part of bone structure.  Sodium ions can used in water softeners to remove other harmful elements.  We put sodium chloride (table salt) on our food and use it as a preservative.
Cations are formed by the loss of one or two electrons from an element.
Groups 1 and 2 elements form cations.
Cations are named according to the parent element.
Cation charges are indicated with a superscript following the chemical symbol.
Use the link below to answer the following questions:
How many electrons are there in the outer shell of Group IA elements?
What is the charge of Group IA ions?
How many electrons are there in the outer shell of Group IIA elements?
What is the charge of Group IIA ions?
What is an ion?
