A nonionized molecule must be relatively polar to interact with water molecules.
Use the link below to answer the following question:
Explain why ethylene glycol will dissolve in water.
What are the main forces that operate between nonpolar molecules?
What part of a molecule is needed for that molecule to dissolve in water?
List some organic molecules that will dissolve well in water.
immiscible:
Liquids that do not dissolve in one another.
miscible:
Liquids that dissolve in one another in all proportions.
polar:
Molecule that has partial negative and positive charges.
Electrolytes and Nonelectrolytes
List common electrolyets and nonelectrolytes.
Excessive sweating can lead to electrolyte loss that can be life-threatening
Why do runners worry about losing electrolytes?
Millions of people in the world jog for exercise.  For the most part, jogging can be a healthy way to stay fit.  However, problems can also develop for those who jog in the heat.  Excessive sweating can lead to electrolyte loss that could be life-threatening.  Early symptoms of electrolyte deficiency can include nausea, fatugue, and dizziness.  If not treated, individuals can experience muscle weakness and increased heart rate (which could lead to a heart attack).  Many sports drinks can be consumed to restore electrolytes quickly in the body.
Electrolytes and Nonelectrolytes
An electrolyte is a compound that conducts an electric current when it is in an aqueous solution or melted.  In order to conduct a current, a substance must contain mobile ions that can move from one electrode to the other.  All ionic compounds are electrolytes.  When ionic compounds dissolve, they break apart into ions which are then able to conduct a current ( conductivity ).  Even insoluble ionic compounds such as CaCO 3 are electrolytes because they can conduct a current in the molten (melted) state.
A nonelectrolyte is a compound that does not conduct an electric current in either aqueous solution or in the molten state.  Many molecular compounds, such as sugar or ethanol, are nonelectrolytes.
