Cellular Respiration - Advanced
Clarify the relationship between breathing and cellular respiration.
In the presence of oxygen.
Why?
Oxygen is made by trees and other plants during photosynthesis.
We know that we need oxygen to live.
But why?
This oxygen is an essential component for the optimal production of usable energy - which occurs through cellular respiration.
You know that humans deprived of oxygen for more than a few minutes will quickly become unconscious and die.
Breathing, also known as respiration , is essential for human life, because the body cannot store oxygen for later use as it does food.
The mammalian respiratory system, shown in Figure below features a diaphragm, trachea, and a thin membrane whose surface area is equivalent to the size of a handball court - all for efficient oxygen intake.
Other forms of life employ different types of respiratory organs: fish and aquatic amphibians and insects flaunt gills, spiders and scorpions develop "book lungs," and terrestrial insects use an elaborate network of tubes called tracheae, which open via spiracles, as shown in Figure below .
A constant supply of oxygen gas is clearly important to life.
However, do you know why you need oxygen?
(left) The human respiratory system is only part of the story of respiration.
Diaphragm, lungs, and trachea take air deep into the body and provide oxygen gas to the bloodstream.
The fate of that oxygen is the story of cellular respiration. (center) Spiracles in this Cluentius Sphinx ( Neococytius cluentius ) caterpillar connect to a system of internal tubes (tracheae), which carry oxygen throughout the animal's body. (right) Gills in this alpine newt larva, Ichthyosaura alpestris , bring blood close to an extensive surface area so that the newt can absorb dissolved oxygen gas from its watery habitat.
Many people would answer that oxygen is needed to make carbon dioxide, the gas exhaled or released by each of the respiratory systems listed above.
However, CO 2 is a waste product.
But a waste product of what?
