The trp operon contains a 140bp leader sequence (trpL) and an attenuator sequence between the leader and the first structural gene (trp E), which allows for graded regulation.
Attenuation is an additional mechanism of negative feedback in the trp operon.
Structure of the trp operon.
The trp operon is composed of 5 structural genes, 1 regulatory gene and other regulatory sequences, including the promoter, operator and leader sequence.
Within the leader sequence is the attenuator region.
In the presence of tryptophan, the structural genes are not transcribed.
Attenuation is an additional mechanism to decrease transcription of the trp operon.
Attenuation is possible because the genetic material of prokaryotes in in the cell's cytoplasm with its ribosomes.
In prokaryotes, it is possible for ribosomes to begin translating the mRNA while RNA polymerase is still transcribing the DNA sequence, allowing translation to have an effect on transcription.
The 140bp trpL leader sequence is a section of the operon between the operator and the structural genes.
This sequence is divided into four short segments designated 1-4, as illustrated in ( Figure below ) .
Sequence 1 is partially complementary to sequence 2, which is partially complementary to sequence 3, which is partially complementary to sequence 4, allowing the sequence to form three distinct hairpin structures identified as 1-2, 2-3 or 3-4.
The hybridization of strands 1 and 2 to form the 1-2 structure prevents the formation of the 2-3 structure, while the formation of the 2-3 hairpin prevents the formation of the 3-4 structure.
The 3-4 hairpin acts as a transcription termination sequence; once the 3-4 structure forms, RNA polymerase will disassociate from the DNA and transcription of the structural genes of the operon will not occur.
A segment of the trpL sequence codes for the leader peptide , a short polypeptide of 14 amino acids.
This segment contains two adjacent tryptophan residues, which is a very rare occurrence.
If the ribosome attempts to translate this leader peptide while tryptophan levels are low, translation will stall at either of the trp codons.
During this time, the ribosome physically blocks segment 1 of the leader sequence, preventing it from forming the 1-2 secondary structure.
Sequence 2 now forms the 2-3 structure with sequence 3, which keeps sequence 3 from forming the 3-4 structure.
This 2-3 structure is called the anti-termination hairpin as it allows RNA polymerase to continue transcribing the entire operon without interference of the ribosome.
