Scientists are still discovering new species.
Thus, they do not know for sure how many species really exist today.
Most estimates range from 5 to 30 million species.
Graphs of known species of organisms, animals, and plants
Known species represent only a fraction of all species that exist on Earth.
Cogs and Wheels
“The first rule of intelligent tinkering is to save all the pieces.” --attributed to Aldo Leopold, but probably a shortened version of: “To save every cog and wheel is the first precaution of intelligent tinkering.” - Aldo Leopold, Round River: from the Journals of Aldo Leopold , 1953
What are the “cogs” and “wheels” of life?
Although the concept of biodiversity did not become a vital component of biology and political science until nearly 40 years after Aldo Leopold’s death in 1948, Leopold – often considered the father of modern ecology - would have likely found the term an appropriate description of his “cogs and wheels.” Literally, biodiversity is the many different kinds ( diversity ) of life ( bio- ).
Biologists, however, always alert to levels of organization, have identified three measures of life’s variation.
Species diversity best fits the literal translation: the number of different species in a particular ecosystem or on Earth.
A second measure recognizes variation within a species: differences among individuals or populations make up genetic diversity .
Finally, as Leopold clearly understood, the “cogs and wheels” include not only life but also the land, sea, and air that support life.
Ecosystem diversity describes the many types of functional units formed by living communities interacting with their environments.
Although all three levels of diversity are important, the term biodiversity usually refers to species diversity.
A discussion of biodiversity is available at
Biodiversity refers to the number of species in an ecosystem or the biosphere as a whole.
Use this resource to answer the questions that follow.
What factors help a region survive?
What is genetic biodiversity?
