In every day use, people often use the word theory to describe a guess or an opinion.
For example, “I have a theory as to why the light bulb is not working.” When used in this common way, “theory” does not have to be based on facts.
It does not have to be based on a true description of reality.
This usage of the word theory often leads to a misconception that can be best summed up by the phrase, "It's not a fact, it's only a theory." In such everyday usage, the word is most similar to the term hypothesis.
Scientific theories are the equivalent of what in everyday speech we would refer to as facts .
In principle, scientific theories are always subject to corrections or inclusion in another, wider theory.
As a general rule for use of the term, theories tend to deal with broader sets of phenomena than do hypotheses, which usually deal with much more specific sets of phenomena or specific applications of a theory.
A video discussing the difference between a hypothesis and a theory can be viewed at  (6:39).
Click on the image above for more content
In time, a confirmed hypothesis may become part of a theory or may grow to become a theory itself.
Scientific hypotheses may be mathematical models.
Sometimes they can be statements, stating that some particular instance of the phenomenon under examination has some characteristic and causal explanations.
These theories have the general form of universal statements, stating that every instance of the phenomenon has a particular characteristic.
A hypothesis may predict the outcome of an experiment in a laboratory or the observation of a natural phenomenon.
A hypothesis should also be falsifiable, and one cannot regard a hypothesis or a theory as scientific if it does not lend itself to being falsified, even in the future.
To meet the “falsifiable” requirement, it must at least in principle be possible to make an observation that would disprove the hypothesis.
A falsifiable hypothesis can greatly simplify the process of testing to determine whether the hypothesis can be proven to be false.
Scientific methods rely heavily on the falsifiability of hypotheses by experimentation and observation in order to answer questions.
Philosopher Karl Popper suggested that all scientific theories should be falsifiable, or otherwise they could not be tested by experiment.
A scientific theory must meet the following requirements:
