What are the most common coordination numbers?
What is the coordination number for Na + in NaCl?
What is the coordination number for Cs + ?
Why are the packing arrangements for Na + and Cs + different?
coordination number:
The number of ions that immediately surround an ion of the opposite charge within a crystal lattice.
Physical Properties of Ionic Compounds
List and describe the physical properties of ionic compounds.
Pictures of amethyst, cinnabar, azurite, and vanadinite
In nature, the ordered arrangement of ionic solids gives rise to beautiful crystals. (A) Amethyst – a form of quartz, SiO 2 , whose purple color comes from iron ions. (B) Cinnabar – the primary ore of mercury is mercury(II) sulfide, HgS. (C) Azurite – a copper mineral, Cu 3 (CO 3 ) 2 (OH) 2 .
D) Vanadinite – the primary ore of vanadium, Pb 5 (VO 4 ) 3 Cl.
What produces colored crystals?
The figure above shows just a few examples of the color and brilliance of naturally occurring ionic crystals.
The regular and orderly arrangement of ions in the crystal lattice is responsible for the various shapes of these crystals, while transition metal ions give rise to the colors.
Physical Properties of Ionic Compounds
Because of the many simultaneous attractions between cations and anions that occur, ionic crystal lattices are very strong.  The process of melting an ionic compound requires the addition of large amounts of energy in order to break all of the ionic bonds in the crystal.  For example, sodium chloride has a melting temperature of about 800°C.
Ionic compounds are generally hard, but brittle.  Why?  It takes a large amount of mechanical force, such as striking a crystal with a hammer, to force one layer of ions to shift relative to its neighbor.
However, when that happens, it brings ions of the same charge next to each other (see Figure below ).  The repulsive forces between like-charged ions cause the crystal to shatter.  When an ionic crystal breaks, it tends to do so along smooth planes because of the regular arrangement of the ions.
Diagram of a shattering sodium chloride crystal
(A) The sodium chloride crystal is shown in two dimensions. (B) When struck by a hammer, the negatively-charged chloride ions are forced near each other and the repulsive force causes the crystal to shatter.
