It is doubtful you would remember all the details of metabolism, neither are they necessarily very pertinent.
However, in participating in a biology course, you will learn to become a critical thinker.
Knowing about the process of science will also allow you to make a more informed decision.
Will you be a scientist?
Yes, in a way.
You may not be formally trained as a scientist, but you will be able to think critically, solve problems, have some idea about what science can and cannot do, and you will also have an understanding of the role of biology in your everyday life.
Biology and You
So why should you study biology?
Because you are surrounded by it every day!
It is about what happens in your brain as you read the words on this page, and about how hippopotamuses know to come up to the surface to breathe even while sleeping.
Biology covers topics from the reason why a person with hook worms doesn't sneeze as much, to why Velcro works.
From understanding the benefits of the vitamin-enriched milk or juice that you have at breakfast, to discerning commercials that promise a fuller head of hair, to snack foods that announce they are the "healthier option for you," you cannot be fully informed about such claims unless you understand the science behind them, or can think like a scientist to analyze them.
For example, you would need to know the types of fats you need to get from your food to know why eating salmon, or other foods such as flax seeds and kiwi fruit may be good for your health.
Salmon has recently been touted as “super-brain food,” but do you know why it is so good for you?
Educating yourself on how science affects your life is important.
It will help you better analyze the validity of such claims, help you take better care of your health, and be a wiser healthcare consumer.
You may also become a stronger advocate for your community.
For example, if a tree planting initiative has begun in your neighborhood, you can investigate the plan for your area and find out what you can do.
You could then explain what the program is about to your friends and family.
Or, perhaps a city park has fallen into disrepair, and city officials are looking for feedback from the public about what to do with it.
