As discussed earlier, the cells of a multicellular organism would not survive as independent cells.
The body of a multicellular organism, such as a tree or a cat, exhibits organization at several levels: tissues, organs, and organ systems.
Similar cells are grouped into tissues, groups of tissues make up organs, and organs with a similar function are grouped into an organ system.
Levels of Organization in Multicellular Organisms
The simplest living multicellular organisms, sponges, are made of many specialized types of cells that work together for a common goal.
Such cell types include digestive cells, tubular pore cells, and epidermal cells.
Though the different cell types create a large, organized, multicellular structure — the visible sponge — they are not organized into true interconnected tissues.
If a sponge is broken up by passing it through a sieve, the sponge will reform on the other side.
However, if the sponge’s cells are separated from each other, the individual cell types cannot survive alone.
Simpler colonial organisms, such as members of the genus Volvox , as shown in Figure above , differ in that their individual cells are free-living and can survive on their own if separated from the colony.
Stained red nuclei in roundworm
This roundworm, a multicellular organism, was stained to highlight the nuclei of all the cells in its body (red dots).
A tissue is a group of connected cells that have a similar function within an organism.
More complex organisms such as jellyfish, coral, and sea anemones have a tissue level of organization.
For example, jellyfish have tissues that have separate protective, digestive, and sensory functions.
Even more complex organisms, such as the roundworm shown in Figure above , while also having differentiated cells and tissues, have an organ level of development.
An organ is a group of tissues that has a specific function or group of functions.
Organs can be as primitive as the brain of a flatworm (a group of nerve cells), as large as the stem of a sequoia (up to 90 meters, or 300 feet, in height), or as complex as a human liver.
The most complex organisms (such as mammals, trees, and flowers) have organ systems.
An organ system is a group of organs that act together to carry out complex related functions, with each organ focusing on a part of the task.
