Photosynthesis involves a complex series of chemical reactions, each of which convert one substance to another.
These reactions taken as a whole can be summarized in a single symbolic representation – as shown in the chemical equation below.
We can substitute words for the chemical symbols.
Then the equation appears as below.
Like all chemical equations, this equation for photosynthesis shows reactants connected by plus signs on the left and products, also connected by plus signs, on the right.
An arrow indicating the process or chemical change leads from the reactants to the products, and conditions necessary for the chemical reaction are written above the arrow.
Note that the same kinds of atoms, and number of atoms, are found on both sides of the equation, but the kinds of compounds they form change.
You use chemical reactions every time you cook or bake.
You add together ingredients (the reactants), place them in specific conditions (often heat), and enjoy the results (the products).
A recipe for chocolate chip cookies written in chemical equation form is shown below.
Compare this familiar recipe to photosynthesis below.
The equation shows that the “ingredients” for photosynthesis are carbon dioxide, water, and light energy.
Plants, algae, and photosynthetic bacteria take in light from the sun, molecules of carbon dioxide from the air, and water molecules from their environment and combine these reactants to produce food (glucose).
Of course, light, carbon dioxide, and water mix in the air even without plants.
But they do not chemically change to make food without very specific necessary conditions which are found only in the cells of photosynthetic organisms.
Necessary conditions include:
enzymes - proteins which speed up chemical reactions
chlorophyll - a pigment within plant cells which absorbs light
chloroplasts - organelles whose membranes embed chlorophyll, accessory pigments, and enzymes in patterns which maximize photosynthesis
Within plant cells or algal cells, chloroplasts organize the enzymes, chlorophyll, and accessory pigment molecules necessary for photosynthesis.
