That replacement process also requires light, working with an enzyme complex to split water molecules.
In this process of photolysis (“splitting by light”), H 2 O molecules are broken into hydrogen ions, electrons, and oxygen atoms.
The electrons replace those originally lost from chlorophyll.
Hydrogen ions and the high-energy electrons from chlorophyll will carry on the energy transformation drama after the light reactions are over.
The oxygen atoms, however, form oxygen gas, which is a waste product of photosynthesis.
The oxygen given off supplies most of the oxygen in our atmosphere.
Before photosynthesis evolved, Earth’s atmosphere lacked oxygen altogether, and this highly reactive gas was toxic to the many organisms living at the time.
Something had to change!
Most contemporary organisms rely on oxygen for efficient respiration.
So plants don’t just “restore” the air, they also had a major role in creating it!
To summarize, chloroplasts “capture” sunlight energy in two ways.
Light ‘‘excites’’ electrons in pigment molecules, and light provides the energy to split water molecules, providing more electrons as well as hydrogen ions.
Light Energy to Chemical Energy
Excited electrons that have absorbed light energy are unstable.
However, the highly organized electron carrier molecules embedded in chloroplast membranes order the flow of these electrons, directing them through electron transport chains (ETCs).
At each transfer, small amounts of energy released by the electrons are captured and put to work or stored.
Some is also lost as heat with each transfer, but overall the light reactions are extremely efficient at capturing light energy and transforming it into chemical energy.
Two sequential transport chains harvest the energy of excited electrons, as shown in Figure below .
(1) First, they pass down an ETC, which captures their energy and uses it to pump hydrogen ions by active transport into the thylakoids.
These concentrated ions store potential energy by forming a chemiosmotic or electrochemical gradient – a higher concentration of both positive charge and hydrogen inside the thylakoid than outside. (The gradient formed by the H + ions is known as a chemiosmotic gradient .) Picture this energy buildup of H + as a dam holding back a waterfall.
