Could this protein be used in crops instead of pesticides?
Traditionally, an insecticidal spray has been produced from these bacteria.
As a spray, the Bt toxin is in an inactive state and requires digestion by an insect to become active and have any effect.
Crop plants have now been engineered to contain and express the genes for the Bt toxin, which they produce in its active form.
When an insect ingests the transgenic crop, it stops feeding and soon thereafter dies as a result of the Bt toxin binding to its gut wall.
Bt corn is now commercially available in a number of countries to control corn borer (an insect like a moth or butterfly), which is otherwise controlled by insecticidal spraying.
Kenyans examining genetically modified insect resistant transgenic Bt corn.
In addition to insects, weeds have also been a menace to farmers - just ask anyone with a garden how much they hate weeds.
They can quickly compete for water and nutrients needed by other plants.
Sure, farmers can use herbicides to kill weeds, but do these chemicals also harm the crops?
Can biotechnology help with this issue?
Some crops have also been genetically engineered to acquire tolerance to the herbicides - allowing the crops to grow, but killing the weeds.
But the lack of cost effective herbicides with a broad range of activity - that do not harm crops - is a problem in weed management.
Multiple applications of numerous herbicides are routinely needed to control the wide range of weeds that are harmful to crops.
And at times these herbicides are being used as a preventive measure – that is, spraying to prevent weeds from developing rather than spraying after weeds form.
So these chemicals are being added to crops.
This practice is followed by mechanical and/or hand weeding to control weeds that are not controlled by the chemicals.
Crops that are tolerant of herbicides would obviously be a tremendous benefit to farmers ( Figure above ).
The introduction of herbicide tolerant crops has the potential to reduce the number of chemicals needed during a growing season, thereby increasing crop yield due to improved weed management and decreased harm to the crops.
In 2001, 626,000 square kilometers of transgenic crops were planted.
