Diagnostic prenatal testing can be by invasive methods or non-invasive methods.
Non-invasive methods are much less risky to the patient.
Non-invasive methods can only evaluate the risk of a condition and cannot actually determine if the fetus has a condition.
Non-invasive techniques include examinations of the mother's womb through ultrasonography and analysis of maternal serum.
If an abnormality is indicated by a non-invasive procedure, a more invasive technique may be employed to gather more information.
Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling (CVS) are invasive procedures.
These involve probes or needles that are inserted into the placenta.
Amniocentesis can be done from about 14 weeks up to about 20 weeks of the pregnancy and CVS can be done earlier, between 9.5 and 12.5 weeks, but is slightly more risky to the unborn child.
During Amniocentesis a small amount of amniotic fluid, which contains fetal cells, is extracted from the amnion or amniotic sac surrounding a developing fetus, and the fetal DNA is examined for genetic abnormalities.
Amniocentesis is not performed for every pregnancy, but is generally done when an increased risk of genetic defects in the fetus is indicated, by mother's age (over 35 years is common), family history of genetic defects, or other factors.
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) involves removing a sample of the chorionic villus (placental tissue) and testing it.
It is generally carried out only on pregnant women over the age of 35 and those whose offspring have a higher risk of Down syndrome and other chromosomal conditions.
The advantage of CVS is that it can be carried out 10-12 weeks after the last period, earlier than amniocentesis.
DNA from the developing baby may be isolated from either an amniocentesis or CVS.
A karyotype may be created from fetal chromosomes following either procedure, or a specific mutation may be analyzed.
So, how do you treat genetic disorders?
If medically possible, each manifestation of a genetic disease can be treated separately.
But is there a way to use genetics to treat the root cause of the disease – that is, to fix the mistake in the DNA?
Gene therapy is the insertion of a new gene into an individual’s cells and tissues to treat a disease, replacing a mutant disease-causing allele with a normal, non-mutant allele.
Although the technology is still in its early stages of development, it has been used with some success.
