Powerful ideas about nature tend to survive, grow more accurate and become more widely accepted.
For example, in developing the theory of relativity, Albert Einstein did not throw out Issac Newton’s laws of motion but rather, he showed them to be only a small part of the bigger, cosmic picture.
That is, the Newtonian laws of motion have limited use within our more general concept of the universe.
For example, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) uses the Newtonian laws of motion to calculate the flight paths of satellites and space vehicles.
The theory of evolution by natural selection is a classic example of a biological theory that has withstood the test of time.
Developed over 150 years ago, a myriad of data has been collected to support Charles Darwin's theory.
So far, no scientific information has been uncovered to contradict or counteract this scientific theory.
Science Cannot Offer Answers to All Questions
There are many things that cannot be examined in a scientific way.
There are, for instance, beliefs that cannot be proved or disproved, such as the existence of supernatural powers, supernatural beings, or the meaning of life.
In other cases, a scientific approach to a question and a scientific answer may be rejected by people who hold to certain beliefs.
Scientists do not have the means to settle moral questions surrounding good and evil, or love and hate, but they can sometimes contribute to the discussion of such issues by identifying the likely reasons for certain actions by humans and the possible consequences of these actions.
science :
A distinctive way of learning about the natural world through observation, inquiry, formulating and testing hypotheses, gathering and analyzing data, and reporting and evaluating findings.
scientific law :
A principle which can be used to predict the behavior of the natural world.
scientist :
An individual who uses the scientific method; a person who engages in a systematic activity to acquire knowledge.
Science is based on the analysis of things that humans can observe either by themselves through their senses, or by using special equipment.
Science therefore cannot explain anything about the natural world that is beyond what is observable by current means.
