These are nearly universal fuels throughout the living world and both are also key players in photosynthesis.
A molecule of glucose, which has the chemical formula C 6 H 12 O 6 , carries a packet of chemical energy just the right size for transport and uptake by cells.
In your body, glucose is the “deliverable” form of energy, carried in your blood through capillaries to each of your roughly 100 trillion cells.
Glucose is also the carbohydrate produced by photosynthesis, and as such is the near-universal food for life.
ATP molecules store smaller quantities of energy, but each releases just the right amount to actually do work within a cell.
Muscle cell proteins, for example, pull each other with the energy released when bonds in ATP break open (discussed below).
The process of photosynthesis also makes and uses ATP - for energy to build glucose.
ATP, then, is the useable form of energy for your cells.
Glucose, C 6 H 12 O 6 , is the energy-rich product of photosynthesis, a universal food for life.
It is also a six-carbon monosaccharide, or simple sugar.
Glucose is the primary form in which your bloodstream delivers energy to every cell in your body, where it is converted into ATP.
The six carbons are numbered.
Why do we need both glucose and ATP?
Why don’t plants just make ATP and be done with it?
If energy were money, ATP would be a quarter.
Enough money to operate a parking meter or washing machine.
Glucose would be a dollar bill (or $10) – much easier to carry around in your wallet, but too large to do the actual work of paying for parking or washing.
Just as we find several denominations of money useful, organisms need several “denominations” of energy – a smaller quantity for work within cells, and a larger quantity for stable storage, transport, and delivery to cells.
Let’s take a closer look at a molecule of ATP.
Although it carries less energy than glucose, its structure is more complex. “A” in ATP refers to the majority of the molecule – adenosine – a combination of a nitrogenous base and a five-carbon sugar. “T” and “P” indicate the three phosphates, linked by bonds which hold the energy actually used by cells.
