Organisms use the atoms of food molecules to build larger organic molecules including proteins, DNA, and fats, and use the energy in food to power life processes.
By breaking the bonds in food molecules, cells release energy to build new compounds.
Although some energy dissipates as heat at each energy transfer, much of it is stored in the newly made molecules.
Chemical bonds in organic molecules are a reservoir of the energy used to make them.
Fueled by the energy from food molecules, cells can combine and recombine the elements of life to form thousands of different molecules.
Both the energy (despite some loss) and the materials (despite being reorganized) pass from producer to consumer – perhaps from algal tails, to water flea hearts, to dragonfly eye colors, to fish muscle, to you!
The process of photosynthesis , which usually begins the flow of energy through life, uses many different kinds of energy-carrying molecules to transform sunlight energy into chemical energy and build food.
Chlorophyll and NADPH
Some carrier molecules hold energy briefly, quickly shifting it like a hot potato to other molecules.
This strategy allows energy to be released in small, controlled amounts.
An example is chlorophyll, the green pigment present in most plants which absorbs solar energy and helps convert that energy into chemical energy.
When a chlorophyll molecule absorbs light energy, electrons are excited and “jump” to a higher energy level.
The excited electrons then bounce to a series of carrier molecules, losing a small amount of energy at each step.
Most of the “lost” energy powers some small cellular task, such as moving ions across a membrane or building up another molecule.
Another short-term energy carrier important to photosynthesis, NADPH , holds chemical energy a bit longer but soon that energy is used to help to build sugar.
NADPH is the reduced form of NADP + , Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate.
NADP + accepts an electron at the end of the light reactions electron transport chain of photosynthesis.
Two related short term energy carriers, NADH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and FADH 2 (flavin adenine dinucleotide) are used during cellular respiration .
Glucose and ATP
Two of the most important energy-carrying molecules are glucose and ATP ( adenosine triphosphate ).
