Prefixes are used in the names of binary molecular compounds to identify the number of atoms of each element.  The Table below shows the prefixes up to ten.
Number of Atoms
The rules for using the prefix system of nomenclature of binary molecular compounds can be summarized as follows.
Generally, the less-electronegative element is written first in the formula, though there are a few exceptions.  Carbon is always first in a formula and hydrogen is after nitrogen in a formula such as NH 3 .  The order of common nonmetals in binary compound formulas is C, P, N, H, S, I, Br, Cl, O, F.
When naming, the appropriate prefix is used only if there are more than one atom of that element in the formula.
The second element is named after the first, but with the ending of the element’s name changed to – ide.  The appropriate prefix is always used for the second element.
The a or o at the end of a prefix is usually dropped from the name when the name of the element begins with a vowel.  As an example, four oxygen atoms is tetroxide instead of tetraoxide.
Some examples of molecular compounds are listed in the Table below .
N 2 O
S 2 Cl 2
Cl 2 O 7
Notice that the mono- prefix is not used with the nitrogen in the first compound, but is used with the oxygen in both of the first two examples.  The S 2 Cl 2 emphasizes that the formulas for molecular compounds are not reduced to their lowest ratios.  The o of mono- and the a of hepta- are dropped from the name when paired with oxide.
Molecular compounds are inorganic compounds that take the form of discrete molecules.
The atoms of these compounds are held together by covalent bonds.
Prefixes are used to indicate the number of atoms of an element that are in the compound.
Use the link below to answer the following questions:
What order is used to write the elements of a molecular compound?
How many elements are in a binary molecular compound?
What is the advantage of using a systematic name over a generic name?
What are molecular compounds?
