The electrons in an atom tend to be arranged in such a way that the energy of the atom is as low as possible.
The ground state of an atom is the lowest energy state of the atom.
When those atoms are given energy, the electrons absorb the energy and move to a higher energy level.
These energy levels of the electrons in atoms are quantized, meaning again that the electron must move from one energy level to another in discrete steps rather than continuously.
An excited state of an atom is a state where its potential energy is higher than the ground state.
An atom in the excited state is not stable.
When it returns back to the ground state, it releases the energy that it had previously gained in the form of electromagnetic radiation.
So how do atoms gain energy in the first place?
One way is to pass an electric current through an enclosed sample of a gas at low pressure.
Since the electron energy levels are unique for each element, every gas discharge tube will glow with a distinctive color depending on the identity of the gas (see Figure below ).
Gas discharge tubes of the noble gases
Gas discharge tubes are enclosed glass tubes filled with a gas at low pressure through which an electric current is passed.
Electrons in the gaseous atoms first become excited, and then fall back to lower energy levels, emitting light of a distinctive color in the process.
Shown are gas discharge tubes of helium, neon, argon, krypton, and xenon.
“Neon” signs are familiar examples of gas discharge tubes.
However, only signs that glow with the red-orange color seen in the figure are actually filled with neon.
Signs of other colors contain different gases or mixtures of gases.
Scientists studied the distinctive pink color of the gas discharge created by hydrogen gas.
When a narrow beam of this light was viewed through a prism, the light was separated into four lines of very specific wavelengths (and frequencies since  \lambda and  v are inversely related).
An atomic emission spectrum is the pattern of lines formed when light passes through a prism to separate it into the different frequencies of light it contains.
