Subsequently, this carrier woman has a fifty percent chance of passing on a X chromosome with a defective gene to each of her male offspring.
The sons of an affected male will not inherit the trait from him, since they receive his Y chromosome and not his X chromosome.
Should an affected male have children with a carrier or colorblind woman, their daughters may be colorblind by inheriting a X chromosome with the mutant gene from each parent.
See  for additional information.
Muscular dystrophy is a term encompassing a variety of muscle wasting diseases.
The most common type, Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) , affects cardiac and skeletal muscle, as well as some mental functions.
DMD is caused by a defective gene for dystrophin, a protein prevalent in skeletal and cardiac muscles.
DMD is an X-linked recessive disorder occurring in 1 in 3,500 male newborns.
Because DMD is X-linked, no females are affected.
Most affected individuals die before their 20th birthday.
Daughters of female carriers of the mutant allele have a 50% chance of also being carriers.
The dystrophin gene, abbreviated DMD, is the largest known human gene.
It is over 2 million base pairs long.
In skeletal and cardiac muscles, dystrophin is part of a group of proteins (a protein complex) that work together to strengthen muscle fibers and protect them from injury as muscles contract and relax.
The dystrophin complex acts as an anchor, connecting each muscle cell's cytoskeleton with the lattice of proteins and other molecules outside the cell (extracellular matrix).
The dystrophin complex may also play a role in cell signaling by interacting with proteins that send and receive chemical signals.
Many different mutations that result in DMD have been identified in the DMD gene.
These mutations typically prevent any functional dystrophin from being produced.
Skeletal and cardiac muscle cells without enough functional dystrophin become damaged as the muscles contract and relax.
The damaged muscle cells weaken and die over time, causing the muscle weakness and heart problems characteristic of muscular dystrophy.
