If DNA never leaves the nucleus, and ribosomes are in the cytoplasm, how does “DNA makes RNA makes protein” actually happen?
The two processes necessary to make a protein from the information in DNA are transcription and translation.
Transcription, which happens in the nucleus, uses the DNA sequence to make an RNA molecule.
The RNA then leaves the nucleus and goes to the cytoplasm where translation occurs on a ribosome and produces a protein.
In RNA is an intermediary between DNA and protein at  , Francis Crick speaks about this process.
The central dogma of molecular biology was first described by Francis Crick, who with James Watson first described the structure of DNA, in 1958 and re-stated in a Nature paper published in 1970.
He stated that, "The central dogma of molecular biology deals with the detailed residue-by-residue transfer of sequential information.
It states that such information cannot be transferred back from protein to either protein or nucleic acid." This central dogma explains the molecular transfer of sequence information.
It was simplified by Marshall Nirenberg, the scientist who cracked the genetic code , who said, "DNA makes RNA makes protein."
The central dogma of molecular biology describes the fundamental process that makes us all different.
We all essentially have the same genes and proteins.
Though we have the same genes, we have different alleles of those genes.
And though we may have the same proteins, such as we have the protein collagen found in bones, many of our proteins are slightly different and thus work slightly differently.
If all our proteins acted the same way, we would all be exactly the same.
Our proteins are slightly different because we have different alleles.
Those alleles are what makes us unique.
They are our particle version of the genetic instructions.
It is those small difference in the DNA sequence of different alleles that is translated into small differences in the mRNA molecules.
And those differences in the mRNAs are then translated into proteins.
And those small differences in the order of amino acids in proteins are enough to make us all different.
