Only autotrophs can transform that ultimate, solar source into the chemical energy in food which powers life, as shown in Figure below .
Food chains carry energy from producers (autotrophs) to consumers (heterotrophs). 99% of energy for life comes from the sun via photosynthesis.
Note that only nutrients recycle.
Energy must continue to flow into the system.
Though this food chains "ends" with decomposers, do decomposers, in fact, digest matter from each level of the food chain? (See the Energy Transfer:
Decomposers (Advanced) concept).
Photosynthesis provides over 99% of the energy supply for life on Earth.
A much smaller group of autotrophs - mostly bacteria in dark or low-oxygen environments - produce food using the chemical energy stored in inorganic molecules such as hydrogen sulfide, ammonia, or methane.
While photosynthesis transforms light energy to chemical energy, this alternate method of making food transfers chemical energy from inorganic to organic molecules.
It is therefore called chemosynthesis , and is characteristic of the tubeworms shown in Figure below .
Some of the most recently discovered chemosynthetic bacteria inhabit deep ocean hot water vents or “black smokers.” There, they use the energy in gases from the Earth’s interior to produce food for a variety of unique heterotrophs: giant tube worms, blind shrimp, giant white crabs, and armored snails.
Some scientists think that chemosynthesis may support life below the surface of Mars, Jupiter's moon, Europa, and other planets as well.
Ecosystems based on chemosynthesis may seem rare and exotic, but they too illustrate the absolute dependence of heterotrophs on autotrophs for food.
Tubeworms deep in the Gulf of Mexico get their energy from chemosynthetic bacteria living within their tissues.
No digestive systems needed!
Phototrophs are organisms that capture light energy and convert it to chemical energy inside their cell.
Most phototrophs are the autotrophs that perform photosynthesis, which are also known as photoautotrophs.
These organisms have the ability to fix carbon from carbon dioxide into organic compounds, such as glucose.
Chemotrophs , on the other hand, do not get their energy from carbon.
These are organisms that break down either organic or inorganic molecules to supply energy for the cell through chemosynthesis.
