The Bohr Model of the Atom
Describe the nuclear model of the atom.
Describe the relationship between atomic emission spectra and electron configuration.
Calculate energy levels.
Describe the shortcomings of the Bohr model of the atom.
Diagram of Rutherford's Gold Foil Experiment
The gold foil experiment was conducted under the supervision of Ernest Rutherford at the University of Manchester in 1909 by Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden.
The popular theory of atomic structure at the time of Rutherford’s experiment was the “plum pudding model.” This theory held that the negatively charged electrons in an atom were floating in a sea of positive charge (the electrons playing the role of plums in a bowl of plum pudding).
Rutherford’s gold foil experiment demonstrated that almost all of the mass of an atom is in a tiny volume in the center of the atom which Rutherford called the nucleus.
This positively charged mass was responsible for deflecting alpha particles propelled through the gold foil.
Rutherford’s “nuclear model” of the atom replaced the plum pudding model in 1911.
The Bohr Model of the Atom
Early History of the Atom
Hypotheses concerning the existence of atoms as indivisible particles were known as early as the ancient Greek philosophers Democritus and Epicurus.
The concepts of atoms that prevailed in the 17 th and 18 th centuries were poorly defined.
Some scientists supposed that atoms could combine into more complex particles but specific chemical and physical properties were not attributed to atoms.
In the period 1780-1803, Lavoisier made careful quantitative measurements which allowed the compositions of compounds to be determined accurately, Proust established the Law of Definite Proportions (each compound always contained the same proportions of elements), and John Dalton had developed the Law of Simple Proportions (compounds composed of the same elements contained simple multiples of component elements).
These laws provided a solid foundation for a more thorough atomic theory.
Dalton’s Atomic Theory
John Dalton developed his atomic theory in 1803.
