On or Off?
That is the key question.
Why are some genes expressed and others are not?
Why do different cell types have different proteins?
How do different cell types have different functions?
The answers to those questions are related.
Gene regulation in eukaryotes is a highly regulated process usually involving many proteins, which either bind to each other or bind to the DNA.
Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
All your cells have the same DNA and therefore the same genes, yet they have different proteins because they express different genes.
In eukaryotic cells, the start of transcription is one of the most complex aspects of gene regulation.
Transcriptional regulation involves the formation of an initiation complex involving interactions between a number of transcription factors, cis-regulatory elements, and enhancers , distant regions of DNA that can loop back to interact with a gene’s promoter.
These regulatory elements occur in unique combinations within a given cell type, resulting in only necessary genes being transcribed in certain cells.
Transcription factors , or trans-acting factors, bind to a DNA strand, usually interacting with cis-regulatory elements, allowing RNA polymerase to bind and start transcription.
Each gene has unique cis-regulatory sequences, only allowing specific transcription factors to bind.
However, there are common regulatory sequences found in most genes.
The TATA box is a cis-regulatory element found in the promoter of most eukaryotic genes.
It has the DNA sequence 5'-TATAAA-3' or a slight variant, and has been highly conserved throughout evolution.
When the appropriate cellular signals are present, RNA polymerase binds to the TATA box, completing the initiation complex.
A number of transcription factors first bind to the TATA box while other transcription factors bind to the previously attached factors, forming a multi-protein complex.
It is only when all the appropriate factors are bound that RNA polymerase will recognize the complex and bind to the DNA, initiating transcription.
