The same is true for species.
All species need other species to survive.
Levels of Organization
In studying how organisms interact with each other, biologists often find it helpful to classify the organisms and interactions into levels of organization.
Similar to the way an organism itself has different levels of organization, the ways in which organisms interact with their environment and each other can also be divided into levels of organization.
For example:
The biosphere includes all living things within all of their environments.
It includes every part of the environment where life exists, from the upper reaches of the atmosphere to the top few meters of soil, to the bottoms of the oceans.
An ecosystem is made up of the relationships among smaller groups of organisms with each other, and with their environment.
Scientists often speak of the interrelatedness of living things, because, according to evolutionary theory, organisms adapt to their environment, and they must also adapt to other organisms in that environment.
A community is made up of the relationships between groups of different species.
For example, the desert communities consist of rabbits, coyotes, snakes, birds, mice and such plants as sahuaro cactus, ocotillo, and creosote bush.
Community structure can be disturbed by such dynamics as fire, human activity, and over-population.
A population is a group of individuals of a single species that mate and interact with one another in a limited geographic area.
For example, a field of flowers which is separated from another field by a hill or other area where none of these flowers occur.
It is thus possible to study biology at many levels, from collections of organisms or communities, to the inner workings of a cell (organelle).
More about the interactions of organisms will be discussed in Concept Ecology (Advanced) .
This picture shows the levels of organization in nature, from the individual organism to the biosphere.
The Diversity of Life
Evolutionary theory and the cell theory give us the basis for how and why organisms relate to each other.
