A scientific law is a statement that describes what always happens under certain conditions in nature.
An example of a scientific law is the law of gravity, which was discovered by Sir Isaac Newton (see Figure below ).
The law of gravity states that objects always fall towards Earth because of the pull of gravity.
Based on this law, Newton could explain many natural events.
He could explain not only why objects such as apples always fall to the ground, but he could also explain why the moon orbits Earth.
In addition to the laws of gravity, Newton also discovered laws of motion.
His laws of motion allowed him to explain why objects move as they do.
Did Newton discover the law of gravity when an apple fell from a tree and hit him on the head?
Probably not, but observations of nature are often the starting points for new ideas about the natural world.
Scientific Ideas Can Change
Science is a process for developing knowledge.
Change in knowledge about the natural world is expected because there is often room for new observations which may challenge current views.
No matter how well one theory explains a set of observations, it is possible that a different theory may explain them just as well or better, or may also encompass a wider range of observations.
Scientists are always testing and attempting to improve theories.
Scientists know that even if there is no way to gain complete knowledge about something, an increasingly accurate understanding of nature will develop over time.
The ability of scientists to make progressively more accurate predictions about the natural world, from determining how the smallest living organisms develop antibiotic resistance, to how "non-living" viruses continue to evolve, from how a cancerous tumor develops its own blood supply, to how mutations lead to cancer and other diseases, from trying to predict earthquakes, to calculating the orbit of an asteroid, provides evidence that scientists are gaining an understanding of how the world works.
Scientific Knowledge Can Stand the Test of Time
Continuity and stability are as much characteristics of science as change is.
Although scientists accept some uncertainty as part of nature, most scientific knowledge stands the test of time.
A changing of ideas, rather than a complete rejection of the ideas, is the usual practice in science.
