In metaphase I, the 23 pairs of homologous chromosomes line up along the equator or the metaphase plate of the cell.
During mitosis, 46 individual chromosomes line up during metaphase, however during meiosis I, the 23 homologous pairs of chromosomes line up.
Chromosomes pairs are moved into position by the spindle fibers, which are now attached to the kinetochores at the centromeres.
Some chromosomes inherited from the father are facing one side of the cell, and some are facing the other side.
This is the basis of independent assortment of chromosomes as suggested by Gregor Mendel.
During anaphase I the spindle fibers shorten, and the homologous chromosome pairs are separated from each other.
This occurs as the chiasmata are severed, pulling homologous chromosomes apart.
One chromosome from each pair moves toward one pole, with the other moving toward the other pole, resulting in a cell with 23 chromosomes at one pole and the other 23 at the other pole.
Each chromosome still contains a pair of sister chromatids; the sister chromatids remain attached at the centromere.
Because human cells have 23 pairs of chromosomes, this independent assortment of chromosomes produces 2 23 , or 8,388,608 possible chromosome configurations.
More on independent assortment of chromosomes will be presented in the concepts on Mendelian Genetics.
Telophase I followed by cytokinesis ends the first division of meiosis.
This reduction division results in two haploid cells, each with a unique combination of chromosomes, some from the father and the rest from the mother.
At this time, each chromosome is comprised of a pair of sister chromatids, even though one has undergone recombination with its homologue.
During telophase I, the spindle fiber disassembles and the nucleus reforms.
The genetic material briefly uncoils back into chromatin.
This is quickly followed by cytokinesis.
Cells may enter a period of rest known as interkinesis or interphase II, or immediately enter meiosis II.
No DNA replication occurs between meiosis I and meiosis II.
Meiosis II includes a division of the chromosomes, similar to that of mitosis.
