PCR utilizes a heat stable DNA polymerase, Taq polymerase (or Taq DNA polymerase), named after the thermophilic bacterium Thermus aquaticus, from which it was originally isolated.
T. aquaticus is a bacterium that lives in hot springs and hydrothermal vents, and Taq polymerase is able to withstand the high temperatures required to denature DNA during PCR (discussed below).
Taq polymerase’s optimum temperature for activity is between 75°C and 80°C.
Recently other DNA polymerases have also been used for PCR.
A basic PCR involves a series of repeating cycles involving three main steps (see Figure below ):
Denaturation of the double stranded DNA.
Annealing of specific oligonucleotide primers.
Extension of the primers to amplify the region of DNA of interest.
These steps will be discussed in additional detail below.
The oligonucleotide primers are single stranded pieces of DNA that correspond to the 5’ and 3’ ends of the DNA region to be amplified.
These primers will anneal to the corresponding segment of denatured DNA.
Taq Polymerase, in the presence of free deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs), will extend the primers to create double stranded DNA.
After many cycles of denaturation, annealing and extension, the region between the two primers will be greatly amplified.
The PCR is commonly carried out in a thermal cycler, a machine that automatically allows heating and cooling of the reactions to control the temperature required at each reaction step (see below).
The PCR usually consists of a series of about 30 to 35 cycles.
Most commonly, PCR is carried out in three repeating steps, with some modifications for the first and last step.
PCR is usually performed in small tubes or wells in a tray, each often beginning with the complete genome of the species being studied.
As only a specific sequence from that genome is of interest, the sequence specific primers are targeted to that sequence.
PCR is done with all the building blocks necessary to create DNA: template DNA, primers, dNTPs, and a DNA polymerase.
The three basic steps of PCR ( Figure below ) are:
