The particular application shown in the photo is the USS Newport News Attack Nuclear Submarine.
In terms of nuclear fuel supply, the USS Newport News leaves port with sufficient fuel to remain underwater for 20 years.
In nuclear naval vessels, the nuclear reaction produces steam and the steam then runs the ship.
A nuclear reactor is a device in which a nuclear chain reaction is carried out at a controlled rate.
When the controlled chain reaction is a fission reaction, the reactor is called a fission reactor.
Fission reactors are used primarily for the production of electricity, although there are a few fission reactors used for military purposes and for research.
The great majority of electrical generating systems all follow a reasonably simple design.
The nuclear reaction boils water into steam, the steam is used to spin a turbine, and the turbine turns an electrical generator.
After the water is turned into steam, the sequence in a fossil fuel generating plant and a nuclear generating plant are approximately the same.
Of course, with the nuclear plant, the reaction chamber must be inside a containment building.
Naturally occurring uranium is composed almost entirely of two isotopes, uranium-238 (99%) and uranium-235 (1%).
It is the uranium-235 that is fissionable (will undergo fission) and therefore, this is the uranium isotope than can be used for fuel in a nuclear reactor.
For uranium to be used as fuel, the percent of uranium-235 must be increased to at least 3%.
Uranium in which the U-235 content is more than 1% is called enriched uranium.
Somehow, the two isotopes must be separated so that enriched uranium is available for use as fuel.
Separating the isotope by chemical means (chemical reactions) is not successful because the isotopes have exactly the same chemistry.
The only essential difference between U-238 and U-235 is their atomic masses; as a result, the two isotopes are separated by a physical means that takes advantage of the difference in mass.
Once the supply of U-235 is acquired, it is placed in a series of long cylindrical tubes called fuel rods.
These fuel cylinders are bundled together with control rods (see diagram below) made of neutron-absorbing material.
The amount of heat generated by the chain reaction is controlled by the rate at which the nuclear reaction occurs.
