These nuclear reactors were originally designed at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory for use as nuclear submarine power plants.
The total mass of a stable nucleus is always less than the sum of the masses of its constituent protons and neutrons.
This is known as mass defect .
As an example of this, consider the mass of a ^4_2 He nucleus compared to the sum of the masses of its constituent nucleons.
The mass of a ^4_2 He  nucleus is 4.002603 amu.
The mass of two neutrons and two protons is (2)(1.008665 \ \text{amu}) + (2)(1.007825 \ \text{amu}) = 4.032980 \ \text{amu} .
Thus, the mass of the helium-4 nucleus is 0.030377 amu less than the masses of its constituents.
The lost mass has gone into energy that is called binding energy .
The binding energy is equal to the amount of energy that would have to be put into the helium-4 nucleus in order to break it into its constituent protons and neutrons.
Without the binding energy, the repulsion between the protons would blow this nucleus apart.
We often refer to the average binding energy per nucleon which is defined as the total binding energy of a nucleus divided by the number of nucleons in the nucleus.
Each nucleus, therefore, has competing forces.
The repulsive force between the protons tends to blow the nucleus apart and the binding energy tends to hold the nucleus together.
If the average binding energy per nucleon overcomes the repulsion, the nucleus stays together and it referred to as stable.
If the repulsion overcomes the average binding energy per nucleon, the nucleus may blow apart or undergo nuclear disintegration .
When a nucleus disintegrates, it throws off pieces of itself and energy in the form of gamma rays .
This disintegration process came to be called radioactivity .
Early researchers in radioactivity found that the emissions from radioactivity could be classified into three distinct types according to their penetrating power.
One type of radiation could barely penetrate a sheet of paper.
The second type could pass through as much as 3 mm of aluminum.
