List different types of interactions that organisms can have with each other.
Identify levels of organization within a biological system.
What does it mean to be interdependent ?
Do species live alone, or do many live in communities with other organisms?
All species rely on other species in some way in order to survive.
They may rely on other species for food, shelter or to help them reproduce.
Here the bee is helping the flower spread its pollen.
Species are not independent, they are interdependent.
Interdependence of Living Things
Biological interactions are the interactions between different organisms in an environment.
In the natural world, no organism is cut off from its surroundings.
Organisms are a part of their environment which is rich in living and non-living elements that interact with each other in some way.
The interactions of an organism with its environment are vital to its survival, and the functioning of the ecosystem as a whole.
These relationships can be categorized into many different classes.
The interactions between two species do not necessarily need to be through direct contact.
Due to the connected nature of ecosystems, species may affect each other through such relationships involving shared resources or common enemies.
The term symbiosis comes from a Greek word that means “living together.” Symbiosis can be used to describe various types of close relationships between organisms of different species, such as mutualism and commensalism , which are relationships in which neither organism is harmed.
Sometimes the term symbiosis is used only for cases where both organisms benefit, sometimes it is used more generally to describe all kinds of close relationships, even when one organism is killed by another, as shown in Figure below .
Symbiosis can also be used to describe relationships where one organism lives on or in another, called parasitism , or when one organism kills and eats another organism, called predation .
These relationships will be further described in Concept Ecology (Advanced) .
