First, the photosynthesis equation summarizes dozens of individual chemical reactions involving many intermediate compounds.
And second, just discovering major players like CO 2 and O 2 was challenging, because our ordinary senses cannot detect these molecules in “thin air!”
How do we know that the chemical reaction in photosynthesis really happens?
Two famous historical experiments help us begin to understand this process.
In the 17 th century, people who thought about it at all assumed that plants get their food from the soil.
Many people, encouraged by sellers of “plant food,” still do.
In 1638, Jan Baptist Van Helmont planted a 5 pound willow tree, like the one shown in the Figure below , in a 200 pound tub of soil.
After 5 years of watering the plant, he weighed both again.
The willow had gained over 160 pounds, but the soil had lost only 2 ounces.
Van Helmont concluded that plants do not get their materials from soil, and inferred that they grow using materials from water (which he did not measure).
As you know now, he was half right.
Although soil provides important nutrients to plants, it supplies neither the energy nor the vast majority of the materials to build the plant.
We must excuse him, because no one in the 17 th century knew that carbon atoms form the basis of life, or that they float around in air in the form of carbon dioxide.
In the 17 th century, Jan Van Helmont, a Flemish chemist, physiologist, and physician, weighed and potted a willow tree, showing that plants do not get food from the soil.
In the late 1770s, minister and natural philosopher Joseph Priestley burned a candle in a jar of air and observed that the candle burned out long before it ran out of wax.
A similar experiment with a mouse resulted in the mouse’s death.
Priestley suggested that animals, like candles, “injure” the air.
Adding a mint plant, as shown in Figure below , however, “restored” the air which had been “injured” by the mouse or the candle.
Only later, after many chemistry experiments, did Priestley publish his discovery of “dephlogisticated air.” But in his studies of mice, plants, and candles, he had shown that plants produce, and animals consume, oxygen gas.
Joseph Priestly's bell jar experiment
