You can see the green color of the chlorophyll.
You cannot see the electron carriers, sequenced within the sac membranes, but their arrangement helps harvest small amounts of energy from excited electrons.
The thylakoid membranes contain molecules of the green pigment chlorophyll.
Pigments and Electron Carriers
Pigment molecules, often arranged together with proteins in large, complex photosystems within the thylakoid membrane, absorb specific wavelengths of light energy and reflect others; therefore, they appear colored.
The most common photosynthetic pigment is chlorophyll , which absorbs blue-violet and red wavelengths of light, and reflects green.
Various types of chlorophyll exist, including chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b.
Accessory pigments absorb other colors of light and then transfer the energy to chlorophyll.
These include xanthophylls (yellow) and carotenoids (orange).
Electron carrier molecules are usually arranged in electron transport chains (ETCs), also within the thylakoid membrane.
These accept and pass along energy-carrying electrons in small steps ( Figure below ).
In this way, they produce ATP and NADPH, which temporarily store chemical energy.
Electrons in transport chains behave much like a ball bouncing down a set of stairs – a little energy is lost with each bounce.
However, the energy “lost” at each step in an electron transport chain accomplishes a little bit of work, including the active transport of H + ions from the stroma into the thylakoid, which eventually results in the synthesis of ATP.
Chlorophyll a is the primary electron donor in the electron transport chain.
This figure shows the light reactions of photosynthesis.
This stage of photosynthesis begins with photosystem II (so named because it was discovered after photosystem I).
Find the two electrons (2 e - ) in photosystem II, and then follow them through the electron transport chain (also called the electron transfer chain) to the formation of NADPH.
Where do the hydrogen ions (H + ) come from that help make ATP?
Now that you’ve met some of the key players and explored the chloroplast, let’s put them together to see how the photosynthetic process unfolds.
