The bilayer results from the chemical nature of the phospholipids in a polar environment.
The phospholipids create a double layer - or bilayer - when placed in a polar environment like water.
Some of these proteins associated with the membrane extend all the way through the bilayer, and some only partially across it.
In this model, the integral membrane proteins have their polar groups protruding from the membrane into the aqueous environment, while the non polar regions of the protein are buried within the hydrophobic interior of the membrane.
This model also proposed that the membrane behaves like a fluid.
Scanning electron microscope images demonstrated that the embedded molecules can move sideways throughout the membrane, meaning the membrane is not solid, but more like a fluid.
The membrane proteins and lipids of the membrane can move laterally around the membrane, much like buoys in water, or sideways throughout the membrane.
Such movement causes a constant change in the "mosaic pattern" of the plasma membrane.
The mosaic pattern results from the many different components of the bilayer.
These components include the phospholipids, integral and peripheral proteins, glycoproteins and glycolipids, which aid in their location and identification of food, water, waste, and other membrane traffic.
Each cell has a particular glycoprotein structure extruding from the cell membrane, based on its need to attract or repel membrane traffic.
The cell is constantly interacting with its environment, bring certain molecules such as ions, hormones and food into the cell, and exporting materials, such as wastes, out of the cell.
A further description of the fluid mosaic model can be viewed in Fluid Mosaic Model of the Cell Membrane at
Click on the image above for more content
Fluid Mosaic Model :
Model of the plasma membrane; proposes that the membrane behaves like a fluid with an embedded mosaic of proteins.
integral membrane proteins :
Proteins that are permanently embedded within the plasma membrane of a cell or organelle.
phospholipid bilayer :
A bilayer (2 layers) of phospholipids that surrounds and encloses a cell; physical boundary between the intracellular space and the extracellular environment.
