You could use scientific thinking to analyze the issue and options, and develop possible solutions.
What Is a Scientist?
What exactly makes a person a scientist and what is their role in society?
First, we should start with what scientists are not.
They are not crazed geniuses with bad hair and a fondness for hysterical laughter, as the Figure below might suggest.
Although they may not be on the cutting edge of fashion, they are regular people.
They went to school like you, they studied math, reading, and science like you, and they probably exhibited at science fairs, just like the students in the Figure below .
Spot the Scientist. (a) An example of what scientists are not. (b) Real-life young scientists at an exhibition where they are presenting their research.
Being a scientist does not require you to learn everything in these over 500 concepts or any other science book by heart, but understanding the important concepts does helps.
Instead, being a scientist begins by thinking like a scientist.
Scientists are curious about how the world works; they have many questions and go about answering those questions using the scientific methods.
If you are fascinated by how things work and why they work a certain way, you too could become a scientist!
Research scientists are the people that do the investigations and make the discoveries that you read or hear about.
To work as a research scientist, a person usually needs an advanced degree in science.
An advanced degree is obtained by attending graduate school after getting a Bachelor of Science, Engineering, or Arts degree.
A Bachelor degree normally takes four years to complete, a graduate Masters degrees usually take two years and a graduate Doctorate degree takes four or more years to complete.
Scientific research offers much more to a person than just discovering new things.
Researchers have the opportunity to meet with other people (scientists and non-scientists) who care about the same subjects that the scientists research such as cancer research, marine ecology, or human nutrition.
Many researchers also teach students who will become the next generation of scientists.
Scientists have many opportunities to work with different people, explore new fields, and broaden their expertise.
