In the liquid state, the molecular motion and the molecular attractions are more balanced.
While the particles stay more or less in contact with each other, they are still free to move and can slide past one another easily.
In the solid state, the attractive forces dominate.
The particles are pulled together into a tightly packed pattern which does not allow the particles to pass each other.
The molecular motion in this form is essentially reduced to vibration in place.
Increasing the temperature of a substance means increasing the molecular motion (kinetic energy) of the molecules in the substance.
The phase in which a substance exists is the result of a competition between attractive forces and molecular motion.
Diagrams illustrating the differences between gas, liquid, and solid states
For most substances, when the temperature of the solid is raised high enough, the substance changes to a liquid, and when the temperature of the liquid is raised high enough, the substance changes to a gas.
We typically visualize a solid as tiny particles in constant motion held together by attractive forces.
As we add heat to the solid, the motion, or the kinetic energy, of the particles increases.
At some temperature, the motion of the particles becomes great enough to overcome the attractive forces.
The thermal energy that was added to the solid up to this point was absorbed by the solid as kinetic energy, increasing the speed of the molecules.
The lowest temperature at which the particles are able to exist in the liquid form is called the melting point .
In order for the molecules to actually separate from each other, more energy must be added.
This energy, called  heat of fusion or heat of melting, is absorbed by the particles as potential energy as the solid changes to a liquid.
Recognize that, once the temperature of a solid has been raised to the melting point, it is still necessary for the solid to absorb additional thermal energy in the form of potential energy as the molecules separate.
The boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which the particles have sufficient molecular motion to exist in the form of a gas.
Once again, however, in order for the particles to separate to the gaseous form, they must absorb a sufficient amount of potential energy.
The amount of potential energy necessary for a phase change to gaseous form is called the heat of vaporization .
