And in the process, transfers some energy to ATP.
Glycolysis:
A Universal and Ancient Pathway for Making ATP
When was the last time you enjoyed yogurt on your breakfast cereal, or had a tetanus shot?
These experiences may appear unconnected, but both relate to bacteria which do not use oxygen to make ATP.
In fact, tetanus bacteria cannot survive if oxygen is present.
However, Lactobacillus acidophilus (bacteria which make yogurt) and Clostridium tetani (bacteria which cause tetanus or lockjaw) share with nearly all organisms the first stage of cellular respiration, glycolysis ( Figure below ).
Because glycolysis is universal, whereas aerobic (oxygen-requiring) cellular respiration is not, most biologists consider it to be the most fundamental and primitive pathway for making ATP.
Clostridium tetani bacteria are obligate anaerobes, which cannot grow in the presence of oxygen and use a variation of glycolysis to make ATP.
Because they can grow in deep puncture wounds and secrete a toxin, which can cause muscle spasms, seizures, and death, most people receive tetanus vaccinations at least every ten years throughout life.
Return to the overall equation for cellular respiration:
Like photosynthesis, the process represented by this equation is actually many small, individual chemical reactions.
We grouped the reactions of photosynthesis into two stages, the light reactions and the Calvin Cycle.
We will divide the reactions of cellular respiration into three stages: glycolysis, the Krebs Cycle , and the electron transport chain ( Figure below ).
In this concept, Stage 1, glycolysis, the oldest and most widespread pathway for making ATP, is discussed.
Before diving into the details, we must note that this first stage of cellular respiration is unique among the three stages: it does not require oxygen, and it does not take place in the mitochondrion.
The chemical reactions of glycolysis occur without oxygen in the cytosol of the cell ( Figure below ).
The many steps in the process of aerobic cellular respiration can be divided into three stages.
The first stage, glycolysis, produces ATP without oxygen.
Because this part of the cellular respiration pathway is universal, biologists consider it the oldest segment.
