It also acts as an antioxidant, preventing arterial damage from inflammation that normally occurs in arteriosclerosis .
People with the Apo-A1M gene have significantly lower levels of risk than the general population for heart disease.
Antioxidants are important for the health of a cell.
An antioxidant is a molecule that inhibits the oxidation of other molecules.
Oxidation is a chemical reaction that transfers electrons or hydrogen from a substance to an oxidizing agent, producing free radicals in the process.
These free radicals initiate a chain reaction in the cell that can cause cell damage, or can lead to cell death.
Antioxidants prevent these chain reactions from even initiating.
Beneficial mutations are also found in many bacteria that allow them to survive in the presence of antibiotic drugs.
The mutations lead to antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria, producing strains that have adapted to their environment.
By definition, that is evolution.
Mutations can result in errors in protein sequence, creating partially or completely non-functional proteins.
These can obviously result in harm to the cell and organism.
To function correctly and maintain homeostasis , each cell depends on thousands of proteins to all work together to perform the functions of the cell.
When a mutation alters a protein that plays a critical role in the cell, the cell, tissue, organ, or organ system may not function properly, resulting in a medical condition.
A condition caused by mutations in one or more genes is called a genetic disorder or genetic disease.
However, only a small percentage of mutations cause genetic disorders; most have no impact on health.
If a mutation does not change the protein sequence or structure, resulting in the same function, it will have no effect on the cell.
Often, these mutations are repaired by the DNA repair system of the cell.
Each cell has a number of pathways through which enzymes recognize and repair mistakes in DNA ( Figure below ).
Because DNA can be damaged or mutated in many ways, the process of DNA repair is an important way in which the cell protects itself to maintain proper function.
