And that is what makes us unique.
The human genome is the genome - all the DNA - of Homo sapiens .
Humans have about 3.2 billion bases of information, divided into roughly 20,000 to 23,000 genes, which are spread among non-coding sequences of DNA and distributed among 24 distinct chromosomes (22 autosomes plus the X and Y sex chromosomes) ( Figure below ).
These 24 chromosomes are arranged into 23 pairs: 22 pairs of autosomes, numbered 1-22, with chromosome 1 being the largest and chromosome 22 the smallest, and one pair of sex chromosomes.
Females have a pair of X chromosomes, while males have an X and a Y chromosome.
The genome is all of the hereditary information encoded in the DNA, including the genes and non-coding sequences.
The Human Genome Project (see the DNA Technology:
The Human Genome Project (Advanced) concept) has produced a reference sequence of the human genome.
The human genome consists of protein-coding exons, associated introns and regulatory sequences, genes that encode other RNA molecules, and “junk” DNA, regions in which no function as yet been identified.
Human Genome, Chromosomes, and Genes.
Each chromosome of the human genome contains many genes as well as noncoding intergenic (between genes) regions.
Each pair of chromosomes is shown here in a different color.
Notice that there are 23 pairs of chromosomes.
Satellite DNA and Transposons
The majority of the human genome is non-coding sequence.
These sequences include regulatory sequences, and DNA with unknown functions.
These sequences include tandem repeat elements known as satellite DNA , and transposons.
Satellite DNA consists of very large arrays of tandemly repeating, non-coding DNA.
The repeating units can be just a single base (a mono nucleotide repeat), two bases (a dinucleotide repeat), three bases (a trinucleotide repeat) or a much larger repeating unit.
Some repeating units are several thousand base pairs long, and the total size of a satellite DNA segment can be several megabases without interruption.
