All eukaryotic cells have a cytoskeleton, and recent research has shown that prokaryotic cells also have a cytoskeleton.
The eukaryotic cytoskeleton is made up of a network of long, thin protein fibers and has many functions.
It helps to maintain cell shape, holds organelles in place, and for some cells, it enables cell movement.
The cytoskeleton plays important roles in both the intracellular movement of substances and in cell division.
Certain proteins act like a path that vesicles and organelles move along within the cell.
The threadlike proteins that make up the cytoskeleton continually rebuild to adapt to the cell's constantly changing needs.
Three main kinds of cytoskeleton fibers are microtubules, intermediate filaments, and microfilaments.
Microtubules , shown as (a) in Figure below , are hollow cylinders and are the thickest of the cytoskeleton structures.
They are most commonly made of filaments which are polymers of alpha and beta tubulin, and radiate outwards from an area near the nucleus called the centrosome.
Tubulin is the protein that forms microtubules.
Two forms of tubulin, alpha and beta, form dimers (pairs) which come together to form the hollow cylinders.
The cylinders are twisted around each other to form the microtubules.
Microtubules help the cell keep its shape.
They hold organelles in place and allow them to move around the cell, and they form the mitotic spindle during cell division.
Microtubules also make up parts of cilia and flagella, the organelles that help a cell move.
Microfilaments , shown as (b) in Figure below , are made of two thin actin chains that are twisted around one another.
Microfilaments are mostly concentrated just beneath the cell membrane, where they support the cell and help the cell keep its shape.
Microfilaments form cytoplasmatic extentions, such as pseudopodia and microvilli , which allow certain cells to move.
The actin of the microfilaments interacts with the protein myosin to cause contraction in muscle cells.
Microfilaments are found in almost every cell, and are numerous in muscle cells and in cells that move by changing shape, such as phagocytes (white blood cells that search the body for bacteria and other invaders).
