If a positively charged object is brought near a negatively charged electroscope, it will attract some of the excess electrons up the stem and out of the leaves, causing the leaves to come slightly together.
Similar to the results of a negatively charged rod, if a positively charged rod is brought near the knob of a neutral electroscope, it will attract some electrons up from the leaves onto the knob.
That process causes both of the leaves to be positively charged (excess protons), and the leaves will diverge.
If the positively charged rob is actually touched to the knob, the rob will remove some electrons and then when the rob is removed, the electroscope will remain positively charged.
This is a permanent positive charge.
Electroscope that has been positively charged by induction
Charging an object by touching it with another charged object is called charging by conduction.
By bringing a charged object into contact with an uncharged object, some electrons will migrate to even out the charge on both objects.
Charging by conduction gives the previously uncharged object a permanent charge.
An uncharged object can also be charged using a method called charging by induction .
This process allows a change in charge without actually touching the charged and uncharged objects to each other.
Imagine a negatively charged rod held near the knob, but not touching.
If we place a finger on the knob, some of the electrons will escape into our body, instead of down the stem and into the leaves.
When both our finger and the negatively charged rod are removed, the previously uncharged electroscope now has a slight positive charge.
It was charged by induction.
Notice that charging by induction causes the newly charged object to have the opposite charge as the originally charged object, while charging by conduction gives them both the same charge.
Electric charges exist with the atom.
Atoms contain light-weight, loosely held, negatively charged particles called electrons and heavier, tightly-held, positvely charged particles called protons.
When the number of electrons and the number of protons are equal, the object is neutral.
The loss of electrons gives an ion a positive charge, while the gain of electrons gives it a negative charge.
