In the entire span of the time, humans are a relatively new addition.
History of Evolutionary Thought
The theory of evolution by natural selection was proposed at about the same time by both Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace, shown in Figure below , and was set out in detail in Darwin's 1859 book On the Origin of Species .
Natural selection is a process that causes heritable traits that are helpful for survival and reproduction to become more common, and harmful traits, or traits that are not helpful or advantageous for survival to become more rare in a population of organisms.
This occurs because organisms with advantageous traits are more "fit" to survive in a particular environment and have "adapted" to the conditions of that environment.
These individuals will have greater reproductive success than organisms less fit for survival in the environment.
This will lead to an increase in the number of organisms with the advantageous trait(s) over time.
Over many generations, adaptations occur through a combination of successive, small, random changes in traits, and natural selection of those variants best-suited for their environment.
Natural selection is one of the cornerstones of modern biology.
Charles Darwin, left (1809-1882), and Alfred Russel Wallace, right (1823-1913).
Both scientists proposed a process of evolution by natural selection at about the same time.
However, Darwin is primarily associated with the theory of evolution by natural selection due to his abundance of data.
The theory of evolution encountered initial resistance from religious authorities who believed humans were divinely set apart from the animal kingdom.
There was considerable concern about Darwin’s proposal of an entirely scientific explanation for the origin of humans.
Many people found such an explanation to be in direct conflict with their religious beliefs.
A caricature of Darwin as a monkey, shown in Figure below , reflects the controversy that arose over evolutionary theory.
In the 1930s, Darwinian natural selection was combined with Mendelian inheritance to form the basis of modern evolutionary theory.
An 1871 caricature portraying Darwin with an ape body and the bushy beard he grew in 1866.
Such satire reflected the cultural backlash against evolution.
The identification of DNA as the genetic material by Oswald Avery and colleagues in the 1940s, as well as the publication of the structure of DNA by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953, demonstrated the physical basis for inheritance.
