Over time, the ancient internal prokaryote turned into an organelle, resulting in a large cell with an internal organelle.
By definition, this is an eukaryotic cell.
Unlike nuclear DNA which is inherited from the father and mother, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA is most often inherited from mothers.
However paternal mtDNA occasionally slips through with sperm.
The technical process is still unclear but a study was down using Caenorhabditis elegans that showed double membrane vesicles, called autophagosomes, engulf paternal mitochondria and destroy them.
Since mothers provide the mtDNA and fathers will never pass on a mtDNA, a child shares the same or similar mtDNA sequence as does his/her siblings and mother.
This direct inheritance has allowed biologists to track the origin of modern human and to draw maternal lineages.
Unfortunately, maternal mt(DNA)is susceptible to mutations which are a cause of inherited disease, such as breast cancer.
Although, it is important to note that most mutations do not lead to defected mtDNA.
Heteroplasmy is the presence of a mixture of more than one type of mtDNA.
Most people have homoplasmic cells, meaning that their cells contain only normal, undefected mtDNA.
However, people with both normal, undefected mtDNA and not normal, defected mtDNA, may inherit mitochondrial diseases.
The ultimate condition leading to disease is when the proportion of mutant mtDNA reaches a threshold, after which the cell can no longer cope, resulting in disease.
This threshold varies among different tissues and different mutations.
ATP ( adenosine triphosphate ):
Energy-carrying molecule that cells use to power their metabolic processes; energy-currency of the cell.
ATP synthase :
Ion channel and enzyme complex; chemically bonds a phosphate group to ADP, producing ATP as H + ions flow through the ion channel.
cellular respiration :
Metabolic process which transfers chemical energy from glucose (a deliverable fuel molecule) to ATP (a usable energy-rich molecule); most efficient in the presence of oxygen (aerobic).
