They haven’t localized the love site, but they’re working on it.
One of the more interesting and useful approaches to radioisotope use in medicine is positron emission tomography (PET) , often referred to as a PET scan.
This technique is especially useful in studying the processes in the brain.
Many compounds do not enter the brain because of what is called the “ blood-brain barrier ,” a filtering system to block material from being transported into brain tissue.
This mechanism serves to protect the brain from a wide variety of harmful substances.
In order to get a good picture of what is happening in the brain, radiolabels are attached to different compounds that will enter the brain.
Since the brain uses about 25% of the glucose found in the body, this molecule is often labeled with a positron emitter such as F-18 (half-life of 109.8 minutes) to study brain function in general.
Other labels are attached to specific compounds that will localize in certain areas of the brain to look at specific structures.
The PET scanner detects gamma emissions from the collision of a positron with an electron (see Figure below ).
As the positron is released from the nucleus of the atom, it will collide with an electron.
This meeting of matter (electron) with antimatter (positron) results in annihilation of both particles and the release of two gamma emissions that are 180° apart from one another.
The apparatus detects these gamma rays and stores the data in a computer.
From this information, a detailed picture of the brain can be developed.
Positron emission scanner
Scanner used to detect positron emissions.
One useful application of PET scanning is in the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease.
This debilitating memory loss condition primarily occurs in elderly individuals.
A protein known as beta-amyloid gradually forms deposits in the brain called plaque.
Memory loss and impaired movement are the result of the plaque growth.
The compound known as Pittsburgh compound B is often used to identify areas of plaque in the brain.
