What definition is given in the video for energy?
What is the definition given in the video for work?
What unit is used in the video for work?
Visit the following website and answer the questions for practice at calculating work.
How much work is done by the force of gravity when a 45 N object falls to the ground from a height of 4.6 m?
A workman carries some lumber up a staircase.  The workman moves 9.6 m vertically and 22 m horizontally.  If the lumber weighs 45 N, how much work was done by the workman?
A barge is pulled down a canal by a horse walking beside the canal.  If the angle of the rope is 60.0°, the force exerted is N, and the barge is pulled 100. m, how much work did the horse do?
Diagram of horse hauling a barge down the canal
work:
A force is said to do work when it acts on a body so that there is a displacement of the point of application, however small, in the direction of the force.
Thus a force does work when it results in movement.  The work done by a constant force of magnitude  F  on a point that moves a distance  d  in the direction of the force is the product,  W = Fd .
joule:  The SI unit of work or energy, equal to the work done by a force of one Newton when its point of application moves through a distance of one meter in the direction of the force.
Given two of the three variables in P=\frac{W}{t} , calculate the third.
Nuclear power station produces thousands of megawatts of power
Typical Pressurized Water Reactors (PWR), a type of nuclear power reactor originally built in the 1970s, produce 1100 to 1500 megawatts, or about 1,500,000,000 Joules/second.
By comparison, a windmill farm with hundreds of individual windmills produces about 5 megawatts (5,000,000 Joules/second).
Power is defined as the rate at which work is done, or the rate at which energy is transformed.
In SI units, power is measured in Joules per second, which is given a special name: the watt , W .
1.00 watt = 1.00 J/s
Another unit for power that is fairly common is horsepower.
