The aseptic technique is also used in medicine, where it is important to keep the human body free of contamination.
Aseptic technique is used whenever bacteria or other microbes are transferred between nutrient media or in the preparation of the nutrient media.
Some equipment that is used in the aseptic technique includes Bunsen burners, autoclaves ( Figure below ), hand and surface sanitizers, neoprene gloves, and fume hoods.
Students of microbiology are taught the principles of aseptic technique by hands-on laboratory practice.
Practice is essential in learning how to handle the lab tools without contaminating them.
A worktop autoclave.
Autoclaves commonly use steam heated to 121°C (250°F), at 103 kPa (15 psi) above atmospheric pressure.
Solid surfaces are effectively sterilized when heated to this temperature.
Liquids can also be sterilized by this process, though additional time is required to reach sterilizing temperature.
In some laboratories, conditions are no more dangerous than in any other room.
In many labs, though, additional hazards are present.
Laboratory hazards are as varied as the subjects of study in laboratories, and might include poisons, infectious agents, flammable, explosive, or radioactive materials, moving machinery, extreme temperatures, or high voltage.
The hazard symbols for corrosive, explosive, and flammable substances are shown in Figure below .
In laboratories where conditions might be dangerous, safety precautions are important.
Lab safety rules minimize a person’s risk of getting hurt, and safety equipment is used to protect the lab user from injury or to help in responding to an emergency.
The hazard symbols for corrosive, explosive, and flammable substances.
Immediate disposal of used needles, and other sharp equipment into a sharps container is standard procedure.
Some safety equipment that you might find in a biology lab includes:
Sharps Container :
A container that is filled with used medical needles and other sharp instruments such as blades, shown in Figure above .
