The frequency of recombination refers to the rate of crossing-over ( recombination ) events between two loci.
This frequency can be used to estimate genetic distances between the two loci, and create a linkage map .
In other words, the frequency can be used to estimate how close or how far apart the two loci are on the chromosome.
In the early 20 th century, Thomas Hunt Morgan, working with the fruit fly Drosophila Melanogaster , showed that genes can be linked.
He showed that genes located on the same chromosome do not show independent assortment.
He was able to demonstrated that the amount of crossing over between linked genes differs.
This led to the idea that the frequency of crossover events would indicate the distance separating genes on a chromosome.
Morgan's student, Alfred Sturtevant, developed the first genetic map, also called a linkage map.
Sturtevant proposed that the greater the distance between linked genes, the greater the chance that non-sister chromatids would cross over in the region between the genes during meiosis.
By determining the number of recombinants - offspring in which a cross-over event has occured - it is possible to determine the approximate distance between the genes.
This distance is called a genetic map unit (m.u.), or a centimorgan , and is defined as the distance between genes for which one product of meiosis in 100 products is a recombinant.
So, a recombinant frequency of 1% (1 out of 100) is equivalent to 1 m.u.
Loci with a recombinant frequency of 10% would be separated by 10 m.u.
The recombination frequency will be 50% when two genes are widely separated on the same chromosome or are located on different chromosomes.
This is the natural result of independent assortment.
Linked genes have recombination frequencies less than 50%.
Thomas Hunt Morgan also demonstrated linkage to sex chromosomes in Drosophila.
See Chromosomes carry genes at and Genes get shuffled when chromosomes exchange pieces at for two animations on the work of Morgan and Sturtevant.
Determining recombination frequencies between genes located on the same chromosome allows a linkage map to be developed.
Linkage mapping is critical for identifying the location of genes that cause genetic diseases.
