This produces either overlapping ends (also known as sticky ends) or blunt ends.
The 1978 Nobel Prize in Medicine was awarded to Daniel Nathans and Hamilton Smith for the discovery of restriction endonucleases.
The first practical use of their work was the manipulation of E. coli bacteria to produce human insulin for diabetics.
Once the DNA of interest is isolated, a ligation procedure is necessary to insert the amplified fragment into a vector to produce the recombinant DNA molecule.
Restriction fragments (or a fragment and a plasmid/vector) can be spliced together, provided their sticky ends are complementary.
Blunt end ligation is also possible.
The plasmid or vector (which is usually circular) is digested with restriction enzymes, opening up the vector to allow insertion of the target DNA.
If the isolated DNA of interest and the plasmid or vector are digested with the same restriction enzyme, their sticky ends will be complementary.
The two DNAs are then incubated with DNA ligase , an enzyme that can attach together strands of DNA with double strand breaks.
This produces a recombinant DNA molecule.
Figure below depicts a plasmid with two additional segments of DNA ligated into the plasmid, producing the recombinant DNA molecule.
Figure below depicts DNA before and after ligation.
(left) This image shows a line drawing of a plasmid.
The plasmid is drawn as two concentric circles that are very close together representing the two strands of DNA, with two large segments and one small segment depicted.
The two large segments (blue and green) indicate antibiotic resistances usually used in a screening procedure, and the small segment (red) indicates an origin of replication, used in DNA replication.
The resulting DNA is a recombinant DNA molecule. (right) Sticky ends produced by restriction enzyme digestion can be joined with the enzyme DNA ligase.
Transfection and Selection
Following ligation, the recombinant DNA is placed into a host cell, usually bacterial, in a process called transfection or transformation.
Finally, the transfected cells are cultured.
Many of these cultures may not contain a plasmid with the target DNA as the transfection process is not usually 100% successful, so the appropriate cultures with the DNA of interest must be selected.
