Mitochondria, like chloroplasts, contain their own DNA and ribosomes and resemble certain bacteria.
The Theory of Endosymbiosis holds that mitochondria, like chloroplasts, were once independently living prokaryotes.
Larger prokaryotes engulfed (or enslaved) these smaller aerobic cells, forming eukaryotic cells.
Many prokaryotes today can perform cellular respiration; perhaps they and mitochondria have common ancestors.
Their expertise in generating ATP made mitochondria highly valued symbionts .
Including these necessary conditions and balancing numbers of atoms on both sides of the arrow, our final equation for the overall process of cellular respiration is:
In words, cellular respiration uses oxygen gas to break apart the carbon-hydrogen bonds in glucose and release their energy to build 38 molecules of ATP.
Most of this process occurs within the mitochondria of the cell.
Carbon dioxide and water are waste products.
This is similar to burning, in which oxygen breaks the carbon-hydrogen bonds in a fuel and releases their chemical energy as heat and light.
Again, carbon dioxide and water are waste.
Cellular Respiration and Photosynthesis
Comparing this process to that of photosynthesis, the similarity between the two processes is striking.
Both are processes within the cell which make chemical energy available for life.
Photosynthesis transforms light energy into chemical energy stored in glucose, and cellular respiration releases the energy from glucose to build ATP, which does the work of life.
Moreover, photosynthesis reactants CO 2 and H 2 O are products of cellular respiration.
And the reactants of respiration, C 6 H 12 O 6 and O 2 , are the products of photosynthesis.
This interdependence is the basis of the carbon-oxygen cycle ( Figure below ), which connects producers to consumers and their environment.
At first glance, the cycle merely seems to show mitochondria undoing what chloroplasts do; but the cycle’s energy transformations power all the diversity, beauty, and mystery of life.
Photosynthesis in the chloroplast and cellular respiration in the mitochondrion show the interdependence of producers and consumers, the flow of energy from sunlight to heat, and the cycling of carbon and oxygen between living world and environment.
