An AB heterozygous individual has type AB blood.
Hemoglobin Beta Gene
Hemoglobin is the iron-containing oxygen-transport protein in the red blood cells of all vertebrates.
The hemoglobin molecule is an assembly of four globular protein subunits, each tightly associated with a non-protein heme group.
The heme group binds to the iron ion.
The most common hemoglobin is hemoglobin A, a tetramer consisting of two alpha and two beta subunits, denoted as α2β2.
Another example of codominance in humans is with the locus for the Beta-globin component of hemoglobin.
The two alleles Hb A and Hb S produce three polypeptides complexes based on the combinations of alleles:
Hb A /Hb A , Hb A /Hb S , and Hb S /Hb S .
In heterozygous individuals, both the alleles are expressed.
Normal hemoglobin is produced with the Hb A allele, while Hb S turns normal, round red blood cells into abnormally curved (sickle) shapes.
Hb S /Hb S results in sickle-cell disease , whereas the heterozygous Hb A /Hb S results in the phenotypically distinct sickle-cell trait .
Sickle cell disease confers some resistance to malaria parasitization of red blood cells, so that individuals with sickle-cell trait (heterozygotes), who do not have sickle-cell disease, have a selective advantage in some environments.
Sickle cell anemia
In sickle cell disease or sickle cell anemia, Hb S /Hb S homozygotes have sickle shaped red blood cells which block blood flow.
Due to codominance, Hb A /Hb S heterozygotes have a mixture of normal and sickle shaped cells.
Incomplete dominance is seen in heterozygous individuals with an intermediate phenotype.
For example, if Mendel had ever observed a medium stem length plant when a tall and short plant were crossed, that would have suggested incomplete dominance.
In incomplete dominant situations, the phenotype expression is dependent on the dosage of the genes.
Two copies of the gene result in full expression, while only one copy produces partial expression and an intermediate phenotype.
