Real and Ideal Gases
An ideal gas is one that follows the gas laws at all conditions of temperature and pressure.
To do so, the gas would need to completely abide by the kinetic-molecular theory.
The gas particles would need to occupy zero volume and they would need to exhibit no attractive forces what so ever toward each other.
Since neither of those conditions can be true, there is no such thing as an ideal gas.
A real gas is a gas that does not behave according to the assumptions of the kinetic-molecular theory.
Fortunately, at the conditions of temperature and pressure that are normally encountered in a laboratory, real gases tend to behave very much like ideal gases.
Under what conditions then, do gases behave least ideally?
When a gas is put under high pressure, its molecules are forced closer together as the empty space between the particles is diminished.
A decrease in the empty space means that the assumption that the volume of the particles themselves is negligible is less valid.
When a gas is cooled, the decrease in kinetic energy of the particles causes them to slow down.
If the particles are moving at slower speeds, the attractive forces between them are more prominent.
Another way to view it is that continued cooling the gas will eventually turn it into a liquid and a liquid is certainly not an ideal gas anymore (see liquid nitrogen in the Figure below ).
In summary, a real gas deviates most from an ideal gas at low temperatures and high pressures.
Gases are most ideal at high temperature and low pressure.
Liquid nitrogen is at such low temperatures that it is no longer a gas
Nitrogen gas that has been cooled to 77 K has turned to a liquid and must be stored in a vacuum insulated container to prevent it from rapidly vaporizing.
The Figure below shows a graph of  \frac{PV}{RT} plotted against pressure for 1 mol of a gas at three different temperatures - 200 K, 500 K, and 1000 K.
An ideal gas would have a value of 1 for that ratio at all temperatures and pressures and the graph would simply be a horizontal line.
As can be seen, deviations from an ideal gas occur.
