If you examine a single leaf of the aquatic plant Elodea , shown in Figure below , under a microscope, you will see within each cell dozens of small green ovals.
These are chloroplasts , the organelles which conduct photosynthesis in plants and algae.
Chloroplasts closely resemble cyanobacteria, containing their own circular DNA and ribosomes.
In fact, the Theory of Endosymbiosis holds that chloroplasts were once independently living bacteria (prokaryotes).
So when we say that photosynthesis occurs within chloroplasts, we speak not only of the organelles within plants and algae, but also of some bacteria – in other words, virtually all photosynthetic autotrophs.
Elodea (above), like all plants and algae, consists of cells which contain organelles called chloroplasts (small green ovals).
If you look carefully at living cells through a microscope, you may see the chloroplasts moving slowly around the cell edges.
The plant itself may not move, but this cyclosis hints at all the action within plant cells.
Remember that chloroplasts are one of the main differences between plant and animal cells; animal cells do not contain chloroplasts.
Both chloroplasts and photosynthetic bacteria contain grana, neat stacks of flattened sac-shaped membrane compartments called thylakoids .
Thylakoids can be considered a sub-organelle within the chloroplast.
Between the chloroplast membrane and the grana is an aqueous fluid known as stroma .
Thylakoids, especially the thylakoid membrane, organize patterns of proteins and other molecules which conduct photosynthesis, as shown in Figure below .
In addition to enzymes, two basic types of molecules - pigments and electron carriers – are significant in this process.
You can take a video tour of a chloroplast at Encyclopedia Britannica:
Chloroplast :
The structure of a chloroplast shows how membrane and molecular architecture helps life processes.
A chloroplast consists of thylakoid membranes surrounded by stroma.
The thylakoids stack on top of each other, like a stack of pancakes.
The thylakoid stacks arrange chlorophyll, accessory pigment molecules, and photosynthetic proteins to capture sunlight and allow a concentration of ions within the sacs.
