Many examples of cooperation between organisms in nature have been observed.
For example, a certain species of amoeba (a single-celled protist) groups together during times of food shortage and forms a colony that moves as one to a new location.
Some of these amoebas then become slightly differentiated from each other.
Volvox, shown in Figure above , is another example of a colonial organism.
Most scientists accept that the Colonial theory explains how multicellular organisms evolved.
Multicellular organisms are organisms that are made up of more than one type of cell and have specialized cells that are grouped together to carry out specialized functions.
Most life that you can see without a microscope is multicellular.
As discussed earlier, the cells of a multicellular organism would not survive as independent cells.
The body of a multicellular organism, such as a tree or a cat, exhibits organization at several levels: tissues, organs, and organ systems.
Similar cells are grouped into tissues, groups of tissues make up organs, and organs with a similar function are grouped into an organ system.
Levels of Organization in Multicellular Organisms
The simplest living multicellular organisms, sponges, are made of many specialized types of cells that work together for a common goal.
Such cell types include digestive cells, tubular pore cells; and epidermal cells.
Though the different cell types create a large organized, multicellular structure—the visible sponge—they are not organized into true interconnected tissues.
If a sponge is broken up by passing it through a sieve, the sponge will reform on the other side.
However, if the sponge’s cells are separated from each other, the individual cell types cannot survive alone.
Simpler colonial organisms, such as members of the genus Volvox, as shown in Figure above , differ in that their individual cells are free-living and can survive on their own if separated from the colony.
Wild-type ''Caenorhabditis elegans''
This roundworm, a multicellular organism, was stained to highlight the nuclei of all the cells in its body (red dots).
A tissue is a group of connected cells that have a similar function within an organism.
