Diagram illustrating the lipid bilayer hypothesis for anesthetics
Do you feel anything now?
When you go to the dentist to get a tooth pulled, you really don’t want to feel any pain.
The dentist injects an anesthetic into your gum and it eventually becomes numb.
One theory as to why anesthetics work deals with the movement of ions across the cell membrane.
The anesthetic gets into the membrane structure and causes shifts in how ions move across the membrane.
If ion movement is disrupted, nerve impulses will not be transmitted and you will not sense pain – at least not until the anesthetic wears off.
A phospholipid is a lipid that contains a phosphate group and is a major component of cell membranes.
A phospholipid consists of a hydrophilic (water-loving) head and hydrophobic (water-fearing) tail (see Figure below ).
The phospholipid is essentially a triglyceride in which a fatty acid has been replaced by a phosphate group of some sort.
Structure of a phospholipid
A phospholipid consists of a head and a tail.
The “head” of the molecule contains the phosphate group and is hydrophilic, meaning that it will dissolve in water.
The “tail” of the molecule is made up of two fatty acids, which are hydrophobic and do not dissolve in water.
Following the rule of “like dissolves like”, the hydrophilic head of the phospholipid molecule dissolves readily in water.
The long fatty acid chains of a phospholipid are nonpolar and thus avoid water because of their insolubility.
In water, phospholipids spontaneously form a double layer called a lipid bilayer in which the hydrophobic tails of phospholipid molecules are sandwiched between two layers of hydrophilic heads (see Figure below ).
In this way, only the heads of the molecules are exposed to the water, while the hydrophobic tails interact only with each other.
Basic structure of a lipid bilayer
In a water solution, phospholipids form a bilayer where the hydrophobic tails point towards each other on the interior and only the hydrophilic heads are exposed to the water.
