A fatty acid is a long carbon chain, generally from 12 to 24 carbons in length, with an attached carboxyl group.
Each of the three fatty acid molecules undergoes an esterification with one of the hydroxyl groups of the glycerol molecule.
The result is a large triester molecule referred to as a triglyceride.
Triglycerides function as a long-term storage form of energy in the human body.
Because of the long carbon chains, triglycerides are nearly nonpolar molecules and thus do not dissolve readily in polar solvents such as water.
Instead, oils and fats are soluble in nonpolar organic solvents such as hexane and ethers.
Fats may be either saturated or unsaturated.
A saturated fat is a fat that consists of triglycerides whose carbon chains consist entirely of carbon-carbon single bonds.
Therefore, the carbon chains are saturated with the maximum number of hydrogen atoms possible.
An unsaturated fat is a fat that consists of triglycerides whose carbon chains contain one or more carbon-carbon double bonds .
A fat with one double bond is called monounsaturated, while a fat with multiple double bonds is called polyunsaturated (see Figure below ).
Example structures of saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fatty acids
Saturated and unsaturated fatty acids
Unsaturated fat is generally considered to be healthier because it contains fewer calories than an equivalent amount of saturated fat.
Additionally, high consumption of saturated fats is linked to an increased risk of cardiovascular disease.
Some examples of foods with high concentrations of saturated fats include butter, cheese, lard, and some fatty meats.
Foods with higher concentrations of unsaturated fats include nuts, avocado, and vegetable oils such as canola oil and olive oil.
The Figure below shows the percentages of fat types in some common foods.
Proportion of saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fats in common foods
Some common foods and oils along with their percentages of saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fats.
