Schematic of a proposed cold fusion design
Do we have heat yet?
In 1989, two scientists announced that they had achieved “cold fusion”, the process of fusing together elements at essentially room temperature to achieve energy production.
The hypothesis was that the fusion would produce more energy than was required to cause the process to occur.
Their process involved the electrolysis of heavy water (water molecules containing some deuterium instead of normal hydrogen) on a palladium electrode.
The experiments could not be reproduced and their scientific reputations were pretty well shot.
However, in more recent years, both industry and government researchers are taking another look at this process.
The device illustrated above is part of a government project, and NASA is completing some studies on the topic as well.
Cold fusion may not be so “cold” after all.
A voltaic cell uses a spontaneous redox reaction to generate an electric current.
It is also possible to do the opposite.
When an external source of direct current is applied to an electrochemical cell, a reaction that is normally nonspontaneous can be made to proceed.
Electrolysis is the process in which electrical energy is used to cause a nonspontaneous chemical reaction to occur.
Electrolysis is responsible for the appearance of many everyday objects such as gold-plated or silver-plated jewelry and chrome-plated car bumpers.
An electrolytic cell is the apparatus used for carrying out an electrolysis reaction.
In an electrolytic cell, electric current is applied to provide a source of electrons for driving the reaction in a nonspontaneous direction.
In a voltaic cell, the reaction goes in a direction that releases electrons spontaneously.
In an electrolytic cell, the input of electrons from an external source forces the reaction to go in the opposite direction.
Illustration of a copper-zinc cell
The spontaneous direction for the reaction between Zn and Cu is for the Zn metal to be oxidized to Zn 2+ ions, while the Cu 2+ ions are reduced to Cu metal.
