Sticky, Wet Water
Water has some unusual properties due to its hydrogen bonds.
One property is cohesion , the tendency for water molecules to stick together.
The cohesive forces between water molecules are responsible for the phenomenon known as surface tension .
The molecules at the surface do not have other like molecules on all sides of them and consequently they cohere more strongly to those directly associated with them on the surface.
For example, if you drop a tiny amount of water onto a very smooth surface, the water molecules will stick together and form a droplet, rather than spread out over the surface.
The same thing happens when water slowly drips from a leaky faucet.
The water doesn't fall from the faucet as individual water molecules but as droplets of water.
The tendency of water to stick together in droplets is also illustrated by the dew drops in Figure below .
Droplets of dew cling to a spider web, demonstrating cohesion, the tendency of water molecules to stick together because of hydrogen bonds.
Another important physical property of water, is adhesion .
In terms of water, adhesion is the bonding of a water molecule to another substance, such as the sides of a leaf's veins.
This process happens because hydrogen bonds are special in that they break and reform with great frequency.
This constant rearranging of hydrogen bonds allows a percentage of all the molecules in a given sample to bond to another substance.
This grip-like characteristic that water molecules form causes capillary action , the ability of a liquid to flow against gravity in a narrow space.
An example of capillary action is when you place a straw into a glass of water.
The water seems to climb up the straw before you even place your mouth on the straw.
The water has created hydrogen bonds with the surface of the straw, causing the water to adhere to the sides of the straw.
As the hydrogen bonds keep interchanging with the straw's surface, the water molecules interchange positions and some begin to ascend the straw.
Adhesion and capillary action are necessary to the survival of most organisms.
