There are many different types of symbiotic interactions between organisms.
Clockwise from top left:
Escherichia coli bacteria live inside your intestines in a mutualistic relationship: the bacteria produce Vitamin K for you, and they get their food from what you eat.
Clownfish that live among the tentacles of sea anemones protect the anemone from anemone-eating fish, and in turn the stinging tentacles of the anemone protect the clownfish from its predators (a special mucus on the clownfish protects it from the stinging tentacles).
Similar to the E. coli , this bee has a mutualistic relationship with the flower, the bee feeds from the flower, and the flower gets pollinated by the bee.
Lions are predators that feed on other organisms such as this Cape buffalo.
A flock of starlings looks out, before searching for parasites on a red deer stag.
Competition is as an interaction between organisms or species, for the same resources such as water, food, or hunting grounds in an environment, shown in Figure below .
Eventually, the species that is less able to compete for resources will either adapt or die out.
According to evolutionary theory, competition for resources plays an important role in natural selection.
Competition between organisms and species.
These male deer are competing for females during rutting (mating) season.
Trees in this forest are in competition for light.
Animals that eat decomposing organic material also have an important interaction with the environment.
They help to decompose dead matter and assist with the recycling of nutrients.
By burying and eating dung, dung beetles, such as the one shown in Figure below , improve nutrient cycling and soil structure.
They make the dead organic matter available to bacteria that break it down even further.
Dung beetles have important interactions with the environment, through which many other organisms benefit.
Organisms are not independent, they are interdependent .
They cannot live alone; they need other organisms to survive.
