Celebrities often campaign to bring public attention to issues that are important to them.
Science and Ethics
Ethics , also called moral philosophy, is the discipline concerned with what is morally good and bad, right and wrong.
The term is also applied to any system or theory of moral values or principles.
Personal ethics is the moral code that a person adheres to, while social ethics includes the moral theory that is applied to groups.
Bioethics is the social ethics of biology and medicine; it deals with the ethical implications of biological research and applications, especially in medicine.
Bioethicists are concerned with the ethical questions that arise in the relationships among biology, biotechnology, medicine, politics, law, and philosophy.
While scientific research has produced social benefits, it has also posed some troubling ethical questions.
For example, when is it alright to test an experimental cancer drug on people?
Developing a new drug takes a long time, maybe as much as 10 years, or more.
There are many rules and regulations that drug researchers need to follow while developing drugs to treat specific illnesses.
Generally, drugs cannot be tested on people until researchers have evidence that the drug does what they claim it does, but also that the drug will not make patients more ill or cause death.
However, if the drug has tested successfully in earlier experiments, and scientists are quite confident that the drug does what it is intended to do, is it ethical to allow patients with a terminal disease, who have no other treatment options, to try the experimental drug?
With new challenges in public health and health policy arising quickly, and with advances in biotechnology being made, bioethics is a fast-growing academic and professional area of inquiry.
Some recent bioethical debates include:
Refusal of medical treatment: the choice of a patient to refuse certain life-saving medical procedures such as a blood transfusion, or refusal by a parent or guardian for medical treatment for the patient.
Euthanasia: the choice by a terminally ill person to have medical assistance in dying.
Stem cell research: research involving stem cells, which can be harvested from human embryos.
Animal cloning: the ability and usefulness of scientists cloning animals for various needs, such as vaccine development, tissues for transplant into humans such as heart valves, and increased food production.
Dolly the sheep, probably the most famous animal clone to date, is shown in Figure below .
