During synapsis, non-sister chromatids may cross-over at points called chiasmata.
Within a chiasma , the genetic material from two non-sister chromatids actually intertwine around each other, and some material from non-sister chromatids switch chromosomes, that is, the material breaks off and reattaches at the same position on the homologous chromosome ( Figure below ).
This exchange of genetic material can happen many times within the same pair of homologous chromosomes, creating unique combinations of alleles.
This process is also known as homologous recombination .
During crossing-over, segments of DNA are exchanged between non-sister chromatids of homologous chromosomes.
Notice how this can result in an allele (A) on one chromosome being moved to the other chromosome.
The four chromatids compose the tetrad, with a chiasma at the point of exchange.
Independent Assortment and Random Fertilization
In humans, there are over 8 million configurations in which the chromosomes can line up during metaphase I of meiosis.
It is the specific processes of meiosis, resulting in four unique haploid cells, that result in these many combinations.
This independent assortment, in which the chromosome inherited from either the father or mother can sort into any gamete, produces the potential for tremendous genetic variation.
This process underlies the chromosomal basis of inheritance.
Gregor Mendel's findings and laws will be discussed in the Inheritance concepts, but essentially, his findings led to the development of two laws of inheritance: the Law of Segregation and the Law of Independent Assortment.
The Law of Segregation states that when any individual produces gametes, the copies of a gene separate so that each gamete receives only one copy (one allele) of that gene.
The Law of Independent Assortment states that separate genes for separate traits are passed independently of one another from parents to offspring.
Together with random fertilization, more possibilities for genetic variation exist between any two people than the number of individuals alive today.
Sexual reproduction is the random fertilization of a gamete from the female using a gamete from the male.
In humans, over 8 million (2 23 ) chromosome combinations exist in the production of gametes in both the male and female.
Essentially, when the homologous pairs of chromosomes line up during metaphase I and then are separated at anaphase I, there are (2 23 ) possible combinations of maternal and paternal chromosomes.
During random fertilization, a sperm cell, with over 8 million possible chromosome combinations, fertilizes an egg cell, which also has over 8 million possible chromosome combinations.
