Genetics is the branch of biology that focuses on heredity.
The basics of heredity are similar for all organisms that reproduce sexually: the offspring receive one set of genetic material from one parent and the other set from the other parent.
But are there aspects of genetics that are specific for humans?
Let’s find out.
Human genetics is the study of inheritance as it occurs in human beings.
Human genetics addresses questions concerning human life.
These include questions about human nature, human development and disease, and the diagnosis and treatment of disease.
The general field of human genetics encompasses a variety of overlapping specific fields including: classical genetics, cytogenetics, molecular genetics, biochemical genetics, genomics, population genetics, developmental genetics, medical genetics and genetic counseling.
All of these specific fields, however, analyze the inheritance of genes in humans.
As the gene is the unit that determines a trait, it is also the unit that determines a disease phenotype.
A genetic disease is a phenotype due to a mutation in a gene or chromosome.
Many of these mutations are present at conception and are therefore in every cell of the body.
Mutant alleles may be inherited from one or both parents, resulting in a dominant or recessive hereditary disease.
Currently, there are over 4,000 known genetic disorders, with many more phenotypes yet to be identified.
Theoretically, every human gene, when disrupted due to a mutation, could result in at least one disease-type phenotype, including prenatal lethal phenotypes.
Genetic diseases are typically diagnosed and treated by a geneticist , a medical doctor specializing in these disorders, many of which are extremely rare and difficult to diagnose.
Individuals and families with genetic diseases, or suspected genetic diseases, are often counseled by genetic counselors , individuals trained in human genetics and counseling.
To understand human genetic diseases, you first need to understand human chromosomes and genes.
Two of the most important human medical geneticists are Victor A.
McKusick (1921–2008) and David L.
