Proto-oncogenes may be growth factors, transcription factors, or other proteins involved in regulation.
A very common oncogene, ras , is normally a regulatory GTPase that switches a signal transduction chain on and off.
Ras and Ras-related proteins are products of oncogenes found in 20% to 30% of human tumors.
The transcription factor myc is an oncogene often seen mutated in Burkitt’s lymphoma, a rare type of lymphoma, a cancer of the lymphocytes.
Ras is a G protein , a regulatory GTP hydrolase that cycles between an activated and inactivated form.
When a growth factor binds to its receptor on the outside of the cell, a signal is relayed to Ras.
As a G protein, Ras is activated when GTP is bound to it.
The active Ras then passes the signal to a series of protein kinases, regulatory proteins that eventually activate transcription factors to alter gene expression and produce proteins that stimulate the cell cycle ( Figure below ).
One important recipient of Ras signaling is the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) .
Once activated, MAPK transmit signals downstream to other protein kinases and gene regulatory proteins.
This cascade of reactions is typical of a signal transaction pathway.
Many of the genes and proteins involved in signal transduction pathways are interconnected to Ras.
Any mutation that makes Ras more active or otherwise interrupts the normal signal transduction pathways ( Figure below ) may result in excessive cell division and cancer.
In Living things share common genes at , Michael Wigler discusses his work on ras, and 1989 Nobel Prize awardees Harold Varmus and Michael Bishop discuss their work retroviruses.
Tumor Suppressor Genes
Tumor suppressor genes, as their name implies, normally suppress tumorigenesis.
When this process is disturbed, such as by a mutation, tumor suppression may not be inhibited as normal.
An example of a tumor suppressor gene is p53 , which encodes a 53,000 dalton (53kd) protein, The p53 gene is activated by DNA damage.
DNA may be damaged by ultraviolet light, and any damaged DNA may be harmful to the cell.
Mutations causing problems with any of the components of Figure below , may lead to the development of cancer.
