Medium-mass stars (less than 3 times the mass of our sun) become a red giants and eventually become a supernova .
A supernova is the massive explosion of a star accompanied by emission of light and matter so intense that it can outshine an entire galaxy.
After a supernove, when all the accessible fuel in a medium-mass star is exhausted, the iron core collapses and proton-electron pairs are converted into neutrons.
Such stars are called neutron stars .
Neutron stars might spin rapidly giving off light and X-rays or they might emit pulses of energy regularly and be known as pulsars .
The largest-mass stars become black holes .
These extremely large stars end their life in the same way as a medium-mass star in that they become a supernova.
After the outer layers are blown away in the supernova, however, the core of the star shrinks down in volume but still has a huge mass.
The density of this object is extremely high, even denser than neutron stars.
This dense object will have a gravitational force so large that not even light can escape from the body. (A companion topic to this occurs in The General Theory of Relativity where we see than extremely strong gravitational attraction can even attract light.) These objects appear black because light cannot leave them, that is, they pull all light back to their surface.
Black holes capture everything nearby due to their massive gravity and so they grow in size.
Black holes are a common topic for science fiction but keep in mind, they are simply a very dense ball of matter with intense gravitational attraction.
A star begins its life in a nebula, struggles to balance gravitational pull and internal pressure during its main sequence period, and ends its life in an explosion to eventually become a white or black dwarf, or a neutron star, or a black hole.
Click on the image above for more content
Follow up questions:
How many stars are there in our galaxy?
What is the primary component of stars?
What is the name of the mass of hydrogen gas before fusion begins?
What is the power source of the stars?
All stars begin as
