percent composition:
The percent by mass of each element in a compound.
Percent of Water in a Hydrate
Calculate the percent water in hydrate when give relevant data.
Copper sulfate changes color when hydrated
Why does the color change?
If you look at a typical bottle of copper sulfate, it will be a bluish-green.
If someone tells you that copper sulfate is white, you won’t believe them.
You are both right; it just depends on the copper sulfate.
Your blue-green copper sulfate has several water molecules attached to it while your friend’s copper sulfate is anhydrous (no water attached).
Why the difference?
The water molecules interact with some of the d electrons in the copper ion and produce the color.
When the water is removed, the electron configuration changes and the color disappears.
Percent of Water in a Hydrate
Many ionic compounds naturally contain water as part of the crystal lattice structure.  A hydrate is a compound that has one or more water molecules bound to each formula unit.  Ionic compounds that contain a transition metal are often highly colored.  Interestingly, it is common for the hydrated form of a compound to be of a different color than the anhydrous form, which has no water in its structure.  A hydrate can usually be converted to the anhydrous compound by heating.
For example, the anhydrous compound cobalt(II) chloride is blue, while the hydrate is a distinctive magenta color.
Anhydrous cobalt chloride is blue, while hydrated cobalt chloride is red
On the left is anhydrous cobalt(II) chloride, CoCl 2 .
On the right is the hydrated form of the compound called cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate, CoCl 2 •6H 2 O.
The hydrated form of cobalt(II) chloride contains six water molecules in each formula unit.  The name of the compound is cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate and its formula is CoCl 2 •6H 2 O.  The formula for water is set apart at the end of the formula with a dot, followed by a coefficient that represents the number of water molecules per formula unit.
