Plasmodesmata (singular, plasmodesma ) are microscopic channels which traverse the cell walls of plant cells and some algal cells.
These junctions enable two cells to transport materials and communication between them.
Plasmodesmata are similar to gap junctions of animal cells.
Like gap junctions, plasmodesmata enable direct intercellular transport of substances between cells.
However, unlike other junctions, plasmodesmata do not seem to be protein based.
Rather, they are made from membrane and cell wall material.
Plasmodesmata move various types of molecules, including transport proteins (including transcription factors), short interfering RNA, messenger RNA and viral genomes from cell to cell.
A typical plant cell may have between 1,000 and 100,000 plasmodesmata connecting it with adjacent cells.
There are two forms of plasmodesmata: primary plasmodesmata, which are formed during cell division, and secondary plasmodesmata, which can form between mature cells.
As plant cells are surrounded by a polysaccharide cell wall, movement of materials and communication between cells is more complicated than in animal cells.
Neighboring plant cells are separated by a pair of cell walls and the space between them, forming an extracellular domain known as the apoplast .
Primary plasmodesmata form during cell division.
These junctions form as portions of the endoplasmic reticulum are trapped in the apoplast as new cell wall is formed between two newly divided plant cells.
This eventually become the cytoplasmic connections between cells (primary plasmodesmata).
Secondary plasmodesmata form as plasmodesmata are inserted into existing cell walls between non-dividing cells.
This process forms a cytoplasmic sleeve, a fluid-filled space enclosed by the cell membrane.
The cytoplasmic sleeve is a continuous extension of the cytosol of the two adjacent cells.
Molecules and ions pass through plasmodesmata using this passage.
These molecules move by diffusion without the need for additional chemical energy.
apoplast :
