However, it is the medical possibilities of biotechnology that most people associate with helping humans.
Understanding and curing genetic diseases is the ultimate goal of human geneticists.
As discussed in the Human Genetics:
Diagnosis and Treatment (Advanced) concept, gene therapy is the insertion of a new gene into an individual’s cells and tissues to treat a disease, replacing a mutant disease-causing allele with a normal, non-mutant allele.
Of course, the findings of the Human Genome Project are significant in determining the disease-causing alleles.
Geneticists must know which are mutant alleles and which are non-mutant or "normal" alleles.
They must also be able to identify alleles that are not just associated with a particular disease phenotype, but cause a disease phenotype.
And of course, scientists must develop and test the technology to replace mutant alleles.
In the 1920s, there was no known way to produce insulin, which was needed by people to remove excess sugar from the bloodstream.
People with diabetes either lack insulin, produce low levels of insulin, or are resistant to insulin, and thus they may need external insulin to control blood glucose levels.
This problem was solved, at least temporarily, when it was found that insulin from a pig’s pancreas could be used in humans.
This method was the primary solution for diabetes until recently.
The problem with insulin from pigs was that there were not enough pigs to provide the quantities of insulin needed.
Scientists needed to devise another way to produce insulin.
This led to one of the biggest breakthroughs in recombinant DNA technology: the cloning of the human insulin gene.
By methods discussed the DNA Technology:
Gene Cloning (Advanced) concept, the specific gene sequence that codes for human insulin was introduced into the bacteria E. coli .
The transformed gene altered the genetic makeup of the bacterial cells, such that in a 24 hour period, billions of E. coli containing the human insulin gene resulted.
Once the recombinant human protein was isolated from the bacteria, enough insulin was available to be administered to patients.
Though the production of human insulin by recombinant DNA procedures is an extremely significant event, many other aspects of DNA technology are beginning to become reality.
