Desert plants (jade plant, right) fix CO 2 by CAM photosynthesis only at night, closing stomata in the daytime to conserve water.
Plants such as corn solve the problem by using a separate compartment to fix CO 2 .
C-4 plants utilize a specific leaf anatomy.
These plants have both bundle-sheath cells, which are photosynthetic cells arranged into tightly packed coverings or sheaths around the veins of a leaf, and loosely arranged mesophyll cells, which lie between the bundle sheath cells and the leaf surface.
The bundle-sheath cells form a protective covering on leaf veins.
The Calvin Cycle is confined to the chloroplasts of these bundle sheath cells in C-4 plants.
Instead of direct fixation to RuBisCO in the Calvin Cycle, CO 2 is incorporated into a 4-carbon organic acid, which has the ability to regenerate CO 2 in the chloroplasts of the bundle sheath cells.
Bundle sheath cells can then utilize this CO 2 to generate carbohydrates by the conventional C-3 pathway.
In this diagram of the cross section of a leaf, bundle sheath cells can be seen in pink around a leaf vein, and mesophyll cells can be seen in green surrounding the bundle sheath cells and the outer layers of the leaf.
Also noticeable is a cut-away of two guard cells (purple) surrounding a stomata.
In these C-4 plants, fixation of CO 2 occurs in mesophyll cells when it combines with a 3-carbon molecule, phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), resulting in a 4-carbon oxaoloacetate molecule.
This reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme PEP carboxylase.
Because the first stable organic molecule has four carbons (oxaoloacetate), this adaptation has the name C-4.
This 4-carbon molecule is converted into another 4-carbon molecule, malate, which is shuttled unto the bundle-sheath cells, where it is broken down into CO 2 and a 3-carbon pyruvate.
When enough CO 2 accumulates, RuBisCo fixes it a second time, this time as part of the Calvin Cycle.
The pyruvate is transported back to the mesophyll cell where it is converted into phosphoenolpyruvate, allowing the process to continue.
Compartmentalization allows efficient use of low concentrations of carbon dioxide in these specialized plants.
See C-4 Photosynthesis at (16:58) for further information.
Click on the image above for more content
Cacti and succulents such as the jade plant avoid water loss by fixing CO 2 only at night.
