The microscope literally opened up an amazing new dimension in the natural sciences, and became a critical tool in the progress of biology.
Magnifying glasses had been in use since the 1300s, but the use of lenses to see very tiny objects was a slowly-developing technology.
The magnification power of early microscopes was very limited by the glass quality used in the lenses and the amount of light reflected off the object.
These early light microscopes had poor resolution and a magnification power of about 10 times.
Compare this to the over 200 times magnification that Leeuwenhoek was able to achieve by carefully grinding his own lenses.
However, in time the quality of microscopes was much improved with better lighting and resolution.
It was through the use of light microscopes that the first discoveries about the cell and the cell theory (1839) were developed.
The Figure below is an example of an early light microscope used by Robert Hooke (1665), the microscopist who was the first to discover cells.
However, by the end of the 19 th century, light microscopes had begun to hit resolution limits, and microscopy became a significant tool in the biological sciences.
Resolution is a measure of the clarity of an image; it is the minimum distance that two points can be separated by and still be distinguished as two separate points.
Because light beams have a physical size, it is difficult to see an object that is about the same size as the wavelength of light.
Objects smaller than about 0.2 micrometers appear fuzzy, and objects below that size just cannot be seen.
Light microscopes were still useful, but most organelles and tiny cell structures were invisible to the light microscope.
(A) English Scientist and Microscopist Robert Hooke’s light microscope. (B) Modern electron microscope.
In the 1930s, a new system was developed that could use a beam of electrons to resolve very tiny dimensions at the molecular level.
Electron microscopes , one of which is shown in Figure above , have been used to produce images of molecules and atoms.
They have been used to visualize the tiny sub-cellular structures that were invisible to light microscopes.
Many of the discoveries made about the cell since the 1950s have been made with electron microscopes.
The first electron microscope was the transmission electron microscope (TEM) .
The TEM works on the same principle as an optical microscope , but uses electrons instead of light and electromagnets in the place of glass lenses.
