Trends in nutrition are like trends in metallic character
What are we eating as a nation?
The graph above indicates some trends in our diet over a thirty-year period.
By observing the direction our eating habits are going, we can take steps to help prevent bad eating habits and decrease problems such as high blood pressure and heart attacks.
Development of the periodic table has helped organize chemical information in many ways.  We can now see trends among properties of different atoms and make predictions about the behavior of specific materials.
Metallic and Nonmetallic Character
Metallic character refers to the level of reactivity of a metal.
Metals tend to lose electrons in chemical reactions, as indicated by their low ionization energies.
Within a compound, metal atoms have relatively low attraction for electrons, as indicated by their low electronegativities.
By following the trend summary in the figure below, you can see that the most reactive metals would reside in the lower left portion of the periodic table.
The most reactive metal is cesium, which is not found in nature as a free element.
It reacts explosively with water and will ignite spontaneously in air.
Francium is below cesium in the alkali metal group, but is so rare that most of its properties have never been observed.
Trends of ionization energy, electron affinity, and metallic character
Trends in behaviors of elements.
Reactivity of metals is based on processes such as the formation of halide compounds with halogens and how easily they displace hydrogen from dilute acids.
The metallic character increases as you go down a group.
Since the ionization energy decreases going down a group (or increases going up a group), the increased ability for metals lower in a group to lose electrons makes them more reactive.  In addition, the atomic radius increases going down a group, placing the outer electrons further away from the nucleus and making that electron less attracted by the nucleus.
Nonmetals tend to gain electrons in chemical reactions and have a high attraction for electrons within a compound.
The most reactive nonmetals reside in the upper right portion of the periodic table.
